Coronavirus updates, June 19: Unlike Quebec, Ontario makes return to classrooms optional
Today's coronavirus updates all in one place.
Quebec to post historic $14.9B deficit in 2020-2021 as virus ravages economy
The province is headed for a staggering, historic deficit of $14.9 billion for 2020-2021 as a result of the ravages of the COVID-19 pandemic on public finances. In an economic update tabled Friday, Finance Minister Eric Girard said Quebec has been "hit hard" by the 100-day pandemic, forcing the province to spend massive amounts on health and relief measures for people in confinement and businesses that were forced to close.
Light foot traffic at Fairview Pointe-Claire as Montreal malls reopen
Shopping malls in the Montreal area were allowed to open Friday, but it will be a while before the stores and their customers are back to normal. Social distancing wasn't a problem at Fairview Pointe-Claire Friday afternoon because foot traffic was light and many of the 200 stores elected not to open.
Montreal's Trudeau airport unveils strict rules for COVID-era travel
Saying it wants to maintain "a healthy and safe environment" for travellers and personnel at Trudeau airport, Aéroports de Montréal on Friday unveiled a series of regulations that will radically change the experience of flying out of Montreal.
Out-of-control fire the size of 40,000 football fields is burning in Quebec
Wind and unabating heat have whipped a forest fire into an inferno north of Lac-Saint-Jean, unleashing pillars of smoke visible from space. SOPFEU, the provincial forest fire authority, declared earlier this week that the fire was "out of control." Dry weather and gusting winds on Thursday accelerated the blaze. It grew from 4,000 hectares that day to over 21,000 on Friday - about the size of 40,000 football fields.
Fête nationale like no other: Celebrations are going online this year
Because of the COVID-19 crisis and the provincial government's banning of all major sporting and cultural events until Aug. 31, there will be no big Fête nationale parade in Montreal. Nor will there be the usual public outdoor concerts in Montreal and on the Plains of Abraham in Quebec City.
Getaway driver in assault on retired police Mafia expert did it for drugs, court told
The man who allegedly acted as the getaway driver when three men assaulted retired police detective Pietro Poletti inside his home in LaSalle last week told police he did it to feed his longtime drug habit. Parts of Louis Simon Jacques's interrogation by the Montreal police were revealed to Quebec Court Judge Mylène Grégoire as the bail hearing for the three men charged with the assault began Friday morning.

