COVID-19 has heightened the impact of the hot, humid weather on some of the most vulnerable among us.
I remember what a staple splash pads and swimming pools were when my kids were younger. A hot, summer day would mean packing a picnic lunch of goldfish crackers, sandwiches, fruit and chips and spending the day at the splash pad with friends. I'd catch up on the latest with friends while the kids would gleefully run around until they wore themselves out. We'd happily bring them back home to shower and nap and get a chance to put our own feet up for a minute or two.
All that has changed this summer due to COVID-19. Many splash pads are closed in my neck of the woods, and parents may think twice about bringing their children to those that are open.
As for going to a public swimming pool, that's complicated, what with limits placed on the number of users because of social distancing and restrictions in some places barring non-residents.
This adds up to a particularly challenging situation, given that public pools and splash pads, which are inexpensive ways to cool off, are typically most used by those of limited means. Not everyone has air conditioning, and even fans are blowing hot air at almost 42 degrees with humidex.
Meanwhile, the elderly, who were hardest hit by COVID-19, are also at grave risk from the heat. I worry about people like like my dad, who practise social distancing and are cooped up at home. Many older people, especially those of more modest means, would normally flock to malls or municipal buildings during heat waves to avail themselves of air-conditioned spaces. While malls have reopened, for the most part, it is still risky to congregate in large numbers in closed-off areas due to the threat of the virus. A lot of folks who would otherwise be cooling off in these venues are now stuck at home.
This heat wave, like the pandemic, will reveal some of the cracks in our society that are otherwise covered by a thin veneer. COVID-19 showed us how poorly we care for our elderly. This heat wave during COVID-19 will show us how poorly we care for our marginalized and less well to do members of our society. My concern is that we will see more infected cases in the coming weeks from individuals seeking some form of air conditioning during this week.
If you have a roof over your head, food to eat and air conditioning, consider yourself blessed. I've seen an increasing number of people taking to local Facebook community groups, asking for help with groceries or a meal because they are struggling to make ends meet. While there are great community groups put in place for precisely this purpose, they continue to need support. Many of us think of helping food banks and shelters in the winter months, particularly around Christmas, but poverty is year round. Those most vulnerable are feeling the pinch, given mass unemployment, the increased cost of groceries and the general economic slowdown.
I know of several food banks on the West Island that encourage members of the community to "grow a row." This means growing an extra row of produce in their gardens and then donating the fruits of their labour. This can make the difference between forcing some people to rely on canned produce rather than fresh fruits and vegetables.
If you are blessed with food, shelter and air conditioning, please think of those who are not. Check in on your loved ones, stay cool and give back however you can. It may only take a few minutes of your time to do so, but can make all the difference for those suffering alone.
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed is the founder and editor in chief of CanadianMomEh.com, a lifestyle blog.
twitter.com/canadianmomeh
Related
Montreal heat wave: Here's where to cool off in newly opened city pools
Jean-Doré Beach opens Saturday - but you'll need a reservation
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for July 9 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

