Here's what happened as the heat wave continued into the night.
Two new reports allege health and safety rules weren't followed at two of Montreal's hardest-hit seniors' residences A report prepared by Quebec's workplace safety board (CNESST) criticizes the CHSLD Vigi Dollard des Ormeaux for allowing staff to move between its so-called hot and cold zones without following the proper protocols. More than 60 people died of COVID-19 at the West Island seniors' residence. The other report, prepared by the Canadian Armed Forces, alleges staff at the Vigi Mont Royal did not follow rules designed to prevent the spread of the coronavirus while its members were assigned there. According to the most recent information supplied by the minister of health and social services, 74 residents at the CHSLD died of COVID-19.
Valérie Plante says Montreal is working hard to find affordable housing for those who must move this summer "It is very important not to leave anyone behind," she said. Finding affordable rental housing in a market in which the vacancy rate is only about 1.5 per cent is challenging at the best of times - and the COVID-19 pandemic has made the experience even more stressful, Plante said. Eighty per cent of Quebec's residential leases expire on June 30 and 80,000 to 100,000 Montrealers will be moving on or around July 1. Anyone worried about finding affordable housing should call 311 and consider it a port of entry, Plante said.
West Island residents are being encouraged to grow vegetables to help food banks West Island Community Shares (WICS) is supporting the initiative through its Solidarity Fund, and Sophie McCann, executive director of WICS, is counting on West Islanders to "grow a row" of veggies in their own backyards to support a worthy cause. "If you're used to growing a vegetable garden, then grow an extra row and give that row of produce back to the food banks," McCann said.The goal of Solidarity Gardens is to help provide fresh produce for 750 West Island families who use food banks on a monthly basis.

