"It's the most wonderful time of the year." No, it's not Christmas that's on my mind, but an infamous office supply store commercial( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iz56prGBiS8 ) that used a holiday tune as a soundtrack. It showed a parent pushing a large red cart while skipping down the aisle getting school supplies as the children followed, dragging their feet along. That commercial would make me cringe as a child. As a parent, I can identify all too well. In fact, I found myself singing that very same tune earlier this week as I started perusing the shelves of the local big box store.
I love my kids. I'm just going to put that out there. However, the incessant Fortnite-playing, and the playdate followed by sleepover, followed by playdate, followed by the movies routines that have been our summer, have been exhausting. For me, anyway. In case you're not familiar with Fortnite: It is the obsession of all children this summer and the bane of their parents. It turns the most boisterous 10-year-old into a game-playing robot. Kids play this game for hours on end. They even link up with one another on a headset so they can play remotely with their friends. (Whatever happened to being given a tennis ball and encouraged to throw it against the garage door?)
The longer days, sweltering heat waves and the endless video game obsession have made this summer one for the record books.
My summer began with a beautiful meme I saw on Facebook, showing a parent lovingly hugging their children, with the caption reminding us that we only have 18 summers with them before they grow up. That inspired me, gave me goosebumps, even. It warmed my heart and made me want to start baking my kids cookies, planning playdates and day trips to the zoo. Then they woke up, and the arguing began, the incessant "he said, she said" arguing, the "he's looking at me funny, she's breathing too loud" accusations that make me want to give myself a time out or better yet, send myself to bed early.
I get it; not everyone is so fortunate to be able to allow their kids the flexibility of staying home for the summer. In fact, a large percentage of parents have little choice but to put their children in day camps while they work outside of the home.
But working from home while your children are also home for the summer is no easy feat. It's a great way to save money, as day camps are not cheap, but not a great way to keep your sanity, unless, of course, you are willing to fall back on a web of support. Whether that support comes in the form of swapping playdates, co-parenting at a park while the kids play together or being blessed to have friends pick up your kids so you can work, it's essential to identify and cling to whatever floats your boat and helps keep your sanity.
Having a pair of pre-teens at home is a blessing. Although they are becoming more autonomous, they still want to spend time with us. I know that the moment they go back to school I will miss them dearly. I will miss the midnight snacks, the sleepovers, the giggling, the day trips, the long walks and the pool parties. The days of routines, after school activities, homework, tests and dictées are around the corner, though there is something to be said for being able to settle back into a routine.
While I know I only have 18 summers with them and will miss them the moment they go back to school, for now, I am counting down the days until the most wonderful time of the year.
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed is the founder and editor in chief of CanadianMomEh.com( http://canadianmomeh.com/ ), a lifestyle blog.
twitter.com/canadianmomeh( http://twitter.com/canadianmomeh )
Related
Allison Hanes: Back to school, back to reality( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-back-to-school-back-to-reality )
Why summer vacation is making kids dumber( https://montrealgazette.com/news/canada/why-summer-vacation-is-making-kids-dumber/wcm/aee66ce8-b2be-482c-b07d-8e908eee1cb1?video_autoplay=true )
CREDIT: Edie Austin, Montreal Gazette

