Catch up on all the big stories that happened this week in Montreal.
Testimony at Alexandre Bissonnette's sentencing hearing was heard throughout the week( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-mosque-shooting )
On Monday, the court heard about Bissonnette's internet usage prior to the 2017 Quebec City mosque shooting( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-mosque-shooter-alexandre-bissonnette-trawled-trumps-twitter-feed ). He was checking Donald Trump's Twitter feed every day. In the lead-up to the attack, he also checked the Twitter feeds of right-wing American commentators, as well as conspiracy theorists, and alt-right and white supremacist/neo-Nazi leaders. Aymen Derbali, who survived the attack but was paralyzed from the waist down, was the first to present a victim-impact statement( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-mosque-shooting-survivor-aymen-derbali-says-bissonnette-is-insincere ). Without looking at the killer, Derbali said he did not believe Bissonnette when he said last month he regretted the shooting. "He was just looking for compassion from the public," Derbali told Judge François Huot. "Believe me, nothing is harder than telling little girls about the death of their father," Louiza Mohamed-Said, whose husband Abdelkrim Hassane died in the attack, told the court on Tuesday( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-mosque-shooter-looked-like-he-was-playing-a-video-game-survivor ). She said Bissonnette committed a hate crime aimed at terrifying the Muslim community.
29-year-old Megda Belkacemi was the first of the 17 children who lost their fathers in the shooting to speak at the the hearing.On Wednesday( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/daughter-of-quebec-mosque-shooting-victim-testifies-with-her-back-to-killer ), she explained that her father was a professor at a university in Algiers where the rector was killed by terrorists. After that, her parents quit their jobs and fled to Canada. Khaled Belkacemi, a 60-year-old food sciences professor at Université Laval was killed in the mosque. "The violence that my parents fled caught us," she said. "I have a deep fear for my security, the security of my family, my future children and of all society knowing" that Bisssonnette may one day be released, she told Justice Francois Huot. Earlier in the day, Ibrahim Bekkari Sbai, who was in the Quebec City mosque on Jan. 29, 2017, implied Bissonnette's father was partly responsible for the massacre, saying he "contributed to the education of a monster." Huot interjected and spent several minutes explaining that based on the evidence before him, there is nothing to back up Sbai's assertion. Huot said that Bissonnette's parents are, in his view, "collateral victims and I'm convinced they are suffering immensely," Zineb Soufiane, whose father, Azzeddine, died after tackling Alexandre Bissonnette during the shooting, testified on Thursday( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec-mosque-shooting-an-act-of-terrorism-community-leader-says ). "He was the best father. He was the best man," Zineb Soufiane, holding back tears, said Thursday. "He wanted to help everybody, Quebecers, whether they were Muslims or not."
The judge is to decide Bissonnette's prison sentence. The maximum punishment he could impose is life in prison without the possibility of parole for 150 years.
Quebec sparred with the federal government over the handling of asylum seekers( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebec-welcomes-ottawas-new-attitude-to-asylum-seeker-issue )
Early on Wednesday( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/come-here-and-look-after-it-quebec-demands-federal-help-with-asylum-seekers ), Premier Philippe Couillard insisted front-line services are at a breaking point and turned up the heat by demanding Ottawa help manage asylum seekers landing here. His immigration minister, David Heurtel, described the province's demand for $146 million for the care of asylum seekers who entered the country illegally at the Canada-U.S. border near the St-Bernard-de-Lacolle post as a starting part. The numbers of crossings have swelled in recent weeks and the province's 1,850 spots for asylum seekers are filling up. In a letter to Heurtel, federal Immigration Minister Ahmed Hussen deplored the fact Quebec has only four temporary shelters up and running, while last summer it had opened 13, including making use of hotels, the former Royal Victoria Hospital and the Olympic Stadium. The letter, Couillard said, shows Ottawa is completely disconnected with what's happening in Quebec. Whereas last year's spike in crossings into Quebec was due to a temporary wave of Haitian asylum seekers fleeing the United States after Donald Trump said they were no longer welcome, the province says today's asylum seekers are coming from all over - including Nigeria and Asia - and 40 per cent don't want to stay in Quebec. "Quebec played a humanitarian role last year and is ready to do it again, but within its capacity to do so. My message to Ottawa is to say it's time to start working. You (Ottawa) have to play your role right now," Couillard said. On Thursday, Heurtel welcomed a "change in tone" from the federal government( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebec-welcomes-ottawas-new-attitude-to-asylum-seeker-issue ). He said Ottawa's attitude had shifted after Couillard blasted Ottawa and that the the federal government was no "listening and interested in concrete measures." That's a far cry from the attitude in March, when Ottawa said it had done enough to help Quebec, he said. At the same time, he said Quebec is not backing away from its plan to impose a ceiling on the number of arrivals it will accept in temporary shelters in the coming weeks: "We are maintaining our ceiling of 1,850 places in temporary housing centres because our resources remain limited. We are not going to open the Olympic Stadium."
Montreal's fire department is out of step with a diverse city, its management acknowledged( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/fire-department-still-mainly-male-and-white )
At present, there are just 29 female firefighters out of 2,360 (1.2 per cent), 24 visible minorities (one per cent) and five Indigenous people (0.2 per cent). The fire department plans to double those numbers in the next three years and triple them by 2025, city health and wellbeing director Suzanne Desjardins and fire chief Bruno Lachance announced at a meeting of the public security committee. Fo Niemi executive director of the Montreal-based Centre for Research-Action on Race Relations, said the plan has good intentions but lacks specifics. "Our biggest concerns are the lack of specifics when it comes to visible minorities and Indigenous people, and when it comes to the role of the union and equity group members inside the department in the design, implementation and evaluation of the plan as well as the department's annual performance," he said.
A Montreal family is fighting to keep Babe, its pet pig, at home( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/family-fights-to-keep-pot-bellied-pet-in-montreal )
Sara-Maude Ravenelle and her husband say Babe is the ideal companion - he's affectionate, gets along with their cats and their 10-month-old daughter, doesn't bark or bite and he does his "business" outside like a dog would. When she adopted the pig, her family lived in Rosemont-La Petite Patrie and they petitioned the borough mayor for permission to keep Babe as a domesticated animal. The mayor - François William Croteau - wrote Ravenelle a letter in 2015 confirming that there were no municipal bylaws preventing her from keeping Babe. But things changed the following year after the administration of Montreal mayor Denis Coderre drafted a list of animals that citizens are permitted to keep in their home. Pot-bellied pigs did not make the cut. The animal list was part of the municipal reforms adopted alongside Coderre's infamous pit-bull ban. But after Coderre lost his bid for re-election last year, the ban was lifted by new Mayor Valérie Plante. However, the animal list hasn't been updated since. After Ravenelle's neighbour lodged a complaint with the borough Tuesday, an inspector came by her home and issued Ravenelle a formal warning to get rid of the 60-pound pig. Montreal mayor Valérie Plante said the situation showed why it was necessary to revise the city's animal bylaw and that she'd been talking with the borough mayor, Pierre Lessard-Blais, who is discussing the situation with Ravanelle. "We're confident we're going to find some kind of a compromise," Plante added.
The first-ever medical marijuana dispensary in the Kanesatake Mohawk territory( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/marijuana-dispensary-on-mohawk-territory )
The dispensary is, strictly speaking, illegal. But puts founder Clifton Ariwakehte Nicholas at odds with the provincial police who patrol Kanesatake and Grand Chief Serge Simon, who insists he won't allow a dispensary on the Mohawk settlement without community consultations. "I'm ready to face whatever is coming my way," Nicholas told the Montreal Gazette. "I believe in my right to health, my right to exist and to prosper in my land. (Cannabis) is an important medicine, but that's a side issue. The real issue is rights." Legislation by the government of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to legalize a recreational cannabis market is expected to come into effect this summer. Nicholas's business is decidedly not a part of that system. Like most Mohawk traditionalists, Nicholas doesn't recognize the federal government's authority over Kanesatake - a 12-square-kilometre parcel of land on the mouth of the Ottawa River. Nicholas knows there's a real risk his dispensary will be raided and he'll see his life savings go up in smoke. But the upside, he says, is worth it. "I've been poor my whole life. In my early childhood, there were 12 of us in a three-bedroom house growing up. My mother scrubbed toilets in Westmount to keep food on our table. At some point, shouldn't we have the right to lift ourselves out of a bad situation?"
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette



