The expansion of the Dollard-des-Ormeaux( https://ville.ddo.qc.ca/en ) Community Centre both reflects nature in its design and harnesses nature to help it keep cozy or cool. The wood, glass and brick expansion was officially unveiled last week.
The structure was completed last summer but the inauguration was postponed until everything was in its place, including the furniture which arrived just last month. The 16,000 square foot addition doubles the size of the facility.
A crowd gathered for the inauguration in a multi-use gathering spot dotted with tables and chairs and equipped with a state-of-the-art kitchen where cooking classes are offered.
Infrastructure grants from the federal and provincial governments covered $5.2 million of the project's $5.4 million cost.
"I'd say we got the good end of the stick in this situation," Mayor Alex Bottausci( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/mayor-elect-in-dollard-des-ormeaux-wants-to-build-on-the-good ) said to the gathering.
Construction was completed during the mandate of former mayor Ed Janiszewski,( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/kramberger-janiszewski-has-been-dollard-mayor-since-84-will-he-run-again ) who was on hand last week to help unveil the inaugural bronze plaque.
Bottausci acknowledged Janiszewski's leading role in bringing the project to life.
"I thank the mayor for his leadership and the last council for having the vision to build this extension," Bottausci said.
An estimated 25,000 people use the community centre every year. The senior population alone has grown precipitously in recent years.
"The senior's program has grown from 500 to 1,000 participants," Bottausci said. "We needed more room."
The structure is made of Quebec-sourced wood. An eight-metre high curtain wall of large glass panels soars two-storeys. Angular metal mullions set in an uneven pattern to mirror the random nature of a forest give the curtain wall its distinctive look. The interior main staircase continues the nature theme with railings that mirror the irregular shape of tree branches.
Minimalist in line and practical in design, the furniture and interiors adhere to a calm palette of pale wood and white accents.
Architect Héloïse Thibodeau produced the drawings and project manager Guy Dubé and head city engineer Érick Laliberté oversaw every detail of the construction.
Generous spruce beams are installed throughout the interior of the building, again referencing nature. The elevator, doors and washrooms are all wheelchair accessible, as is the rooftop terrace.
"The concept was to bring a warmth to the interiors, to give the feeling that you are at home," Laliberté said during a tour of the facility. "And it was designed to be accessible to all ages (and mobility levels.)"
Grand windows installed throughout the three levels flood the building with natural light.
"Light was a very important part of the project," Dubé said. "The natural light gives the place an energy."
A rooftop terrace situated at Dollard's newly-expanded Community Centre. (Peter McCabe / MONTREAL GAZETTE)
A multi-media, conference room is fully-wired for mobile devices and furniture in the workshop can be reconfigured to suit large or small groups. The temperature in the yoga/aerobic studio is adjustable to suit the situation - warmer for yoga, cooler for aerobics.
The building is both heated and cooled by geothermal energy drawn from the earth with the help of a system of wells and pipes installed 500 feet underground. The eco-friendly setup reduces energy costs by 40 per cent.
The upper level has a gathering space for special events, a kitchen and access to the terrace which is illuminated after dark. The rooftop terrace is dotted with flower pots and a grouping of free-standing planters will be planted with vegetables in the coming days.
kgreenaway@postmedia.com( mailto:kgreenaway@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Kathryn Greenaway, Montreal Gazette

