I've never paid much heed to Groundhog Day. No, not the Bill Murray movie, but the Feb. 2 "holiday" itself, when a cute little rodent pokes his head out of a hole and looks for its shadow to predict whether spring is coming sooner or later.
This year, I can't wait for Fred to pop up in Val-d'Espoir out in Quebec's Gaspé region( https://livestream.com/accounts/6944075/events/8537194 ) on Saturday. Because the arrival of February means January 2019 is finally, mercifully over. We're one day closer to the end of winter, no matter what Fred sees. (And to be honest, I'm not particularly optimistic about his forecast).
We just battled through the longest, darkest, most soul-destroying January I can remember. And I say this as someone who likes winter, doesn't mind the odd cold snap and revels in snowstorms. But the bone-chilling temperatures and the wild weather fluctuations of the last month nearly did me in.
The drastic swing from blizzard to polar vortex to freezing rain to rain to flash freeze within the space of mere hours has wreaked havoc on the human spirit and infrastructure alike.
Between the sting of wind chill and the constant fear of falling on the sidewalks, daily life has been downright dangerous. And I'm a reasonably healthy, fairly active, and fully mobile person. I can't even imagine how difficult things have been for the frail, the elderly or the homeless.
The cold claimed the life of Hélène Rowley Hotte, 93( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/montreal-woman-93-freezes-to-death-outside-seniors-residence ), the mother of former Bloc Québécois leader Gilles Duceppe on Jan. 20. She somehow became locked outside her retirement villa in Montreal's east-end during a fire alarm and perished. An investigation into the tragedy is ongoing.
But the ice has led to casualties of its own, with record numbers of falls on slippery streets and sidewalks. Urgences Santé received an astounding 140 calls an hour( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/after-snow-slush-and-flooding-montreals-street-clearing-makes-gains ), up from an average of 70 a day, after the deluge of rain melted the snowpack then rapidly froze into a solid mass with the consistency of concrete and the smoothness of a freshly flooded skating rink. The ambulance service took the step of imploring Montrealers not to go out, the conditions were so dire. Most of us would have been happy to comply, so strong was the urge to hibernate.
A week later, surfaces remain as slick and slippery as ever. The thick layer of ice seems impervious to all efforts to bring it under control. The disastrous weather has clearly complicated the city's snow-clearing efforts, making the task more challenging than usual.
But let's focus on Montreal's snow-clearing operations for a moment. Abysmal circumstances aside, they've been ... abysmal.
Citizens have been complaining. Mayor Valérie Plante sent a stern letter to the boroughs telling them to step up their game( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-raps-boroughs-knuckles-on-snow-removal ). But it seems like it's the same story, year after year, no matter who's in charge or how extraordinary the weather might be.
How is it Montreal hasn't figured this out yet, after 377 years? We seem to have one response to making the sidewalks passable: salt the heck out them. But this week, that proved an exercise in futility. Mother Nature tried to give us a reprieve from the fury she unleashed a week earlier. A fresh coat of snow blanketed the city. But instead of packing it down into a cushioning layer to cover up the ice, we poured so many abrasives on it the snow dissolved into guck with the consistency of brown sugar and the treacherous glaciers beneath were re-exposed. We always seem to want to fight winter. Can't we try to work with it?
As for snow-clearing, why would crews be tackling René Lévesque Blvd., a crucial artery, during the morning rush hour? Why worsen traffic? Why?
Of course, Montreal is not alone in its misery. Much of North America is shivering under a glacial cold, with temperatures more frigid than Antarctica. Canada Goose parkas are being stolen at gunpoint in Chicago, General Motors has shut down production in Michigan to conserve power. Welcome to the age of climate change. It's not just global warming, but extreme weather on both ends of the spectrum.
Good riddance, January! Don't let the door hit you on the way out.
But will February be any better? Regardless of Fred's prediction, it looks like temperatures are going to rise to a seasonal -10 C over the weekend, with periods of snow forecast. By Monday night, however, it could all turn to rain. And back we will plunge into the nasty, messy, vicious cycle again.
ahanes@postmedia.com
Related
Montreal vows to improve snow clearing with drones, bigger dump sites( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-clearing-city-promises-to-do-better-this-year )
Next snow removal will start as soon as this one ends: Plante( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/next-snow-removal-will-start-as-soon-as-this-one-ends-plante )

