According to climate-change experts Ursule Boyer-Villemaire and Philippe Gagnon, it isn't a question of whether it will flood again in the spring, it's a question of how bad the flooding will be.
Boyer-Villemaire and Gagnon are both working at Université du Québec à Montréal - he as a professor and she as a research associate - and both have PhDs in environmental science.
During a recent interview with the West Island Gazette, the two were measured with their optimism, but agreed that there are positive steps being taken in parts of Europe to cope with the realities of climate change and that this part of the world might well take a closer look to see what could be applied here.
Historic flooding affected thousands throughout the province last spring. Hard hit West Island and Off-Island communities included Hudson, Rigaud, Île-Mercier in Île-Bizard, Pierrefonds-Roxboro and Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue. Some people have yet to return to their homes because repairs are not complete. At least four residents of Pierrefonds-Roxboro were told their homes will have to be destroyed.
Gagnon said last spring's disaster was due to a perfect storm of weather incidents which, piled one on top of the other, resulted in a "high-intensity" weather event.
In March, there was snow. Then came heavy rain and a rapid melt. But the ground was frozen solid, so the run-off from the combination of rain and melting snow flowed into rivers or pooled on land.
"There is no doubt that with climate change, with warming conditions - there is more humidity in the atmosphere which can result in high-intensity events during the winter and the spring," Gagnon said. "Our capacity to manage the water cycle is strongly affected by the warming trend."
Water levels in Lake Ontario are high and the thaw has yet to begin. Ice jams and slush can also cause banks to be breached. The Moses-Saunders Power Dam near Cornwall and the Carillon Dam near Rigaud will be called upon to walk the delicate water-management tightrope.
Boyer-Villemaire said planting vegetation on the shoreline helps slow run-off. Combining vegetation with modest rock barriers installed by professionals is the next step. A more substantial, man-made barrier is also an option, but she said the bigger the barrier, the greater the chance that holding the water back on one property could result in water problems on neighbouring properties.
"Whatever is built has to be proven to be for the common good," she said.
Last week, the Quebec government released a 24-point action plan to improve the response to disasters. Better communication between the province and municipalities is part of the plan.
"That's good, but we also need easier access to crucial information for citizens," Boyer-Villemaire said.
She said real estate agents in France are compelled by law to inform potential buyers of any risk attached to a piece of land or a property before a deal is signed. Also in France, a percentage of each real estate deal is added to a fund which can be used to deal with the impact of climate change.
Boyer-Villemaire also spoke of a long-term evacuation plan in the United Kingdom. People who are living in what are now deemed flood plains are given up to 20 years to come to terms with the reality, take the time to grieve, and then look for a place to set down new roots.
The network of dikes in the Netherlands is considered to be the best in the world, built to last by experts in flood defence.
Boyer-Villemaire said drawing on expertise from a variety of sources is necessary as the province fine-tunes its response to disasters.
"And academics should be involved in the planning," she said. "We have knowledge to offer."
kgreenaway@postmedia.com( mailto:kgreenaway@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Kathryn Greenaway, Montreal Gazette

