Despite making progress in its attempt to clear more than 40 cms. of snow that has fallen on the city since Sunday, the ice left behind by that weather remained a real danger for Montreal pedestrians on Friday, so much so that Urgences Santé is urging them to stay indoors unless they have no choice but to go out.
"We are asking the population to delay any non-essential trips (outdoors)," the agency warned on its Twitter account. "The number of calls received for falls because of ice is more than three times than the usual number. If you can get to an emergency room or clinic, do so!"
The warning comes a day that saw surreal images of intersections turned into slush-filled swamps, pedestrians capering like mountain goats to deal with ice-covered sidewalks and vehicles plowing through bumper-high waves of rain and slush, the city of Montreal's snow removal efforts finally seem to be getting the better of a week that included snow storms, freezing rain and showers better suited for spring than January.
As of 9:30 a.m. Friday, the city was reporting that 62 per cent of Montreal's streets and sidewalks had been cleared of snow( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement ) - three percentage points higher than Thursday, and a jump that apparently included some extra efforts being carried out in two heavily populated boroughs.
Sud-Ouest and Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, both of which reported clearance rates of 48 per cent on Thursday, saw their numbers spike to 60 per cent less than a day later.
The borough with the highest completion rate - 90 per cent - was Verdun. Outremont had the lowest, at 36 per cent.
The overnight clearing blitz came after Mayor Valérie Plante acknowledged Montrealers had experienced a difficult week, as a weather cocktail that began with a sub-zero snowstorm Sunday transformed into a 15-cm snowfall Wednesday, followed by freezing rain Wednesday night and rain Thursday. The mayor said the city was "in a race against the clock" to clear the streets before a drop in temperature on Friday transformed the slush and snow into obstacles much harder to remove.
Friday's weather forecast calls for periods of light snow beginning in the morning with a high of -5 C and a wind chill near -16. By nightfall, the forecast low is -12 C, with a wind chill near -18 and a 40 per cent chance of flurries.
Related
Weather wreaks havoc in Montreal: After the storm comes the ice( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/weather-nightmare-continues-schools-closed-treacherous-roads-amid-downpour )
Watch: Montrealers dodge slush puddles( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-montrealers-dodge-slush-puddles-on-jan-24-2019 )
Watch: West Islanders cope with mixed weather( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-west-islanders-cope-with-mixed-weather )

