We have precious little time left to act on climate change, if any. Even if we were to garner a radical transformation of the world economy today, we'd still witness displacement, starvation and destruction on a scale unimaginable to the human mind. This is the last moment left to take action to secure a survivable future, yet we are told that we need to be reasonable and stay in class.
We are walking out of school Friday because we fear there will be little use for our education. We are being taught skills and roles for a world that is already dead. The jobs we are told to prepare for will not exist, and much sooner than we care to believe. The future we see, that scientists have been warning us about for more than 40 years, is far from bright.
We are angry. We are angry that the future that we were supposed to design, engineer and build has been stolen from us. The future is now something to be salvaged, if we are lucky.
It is a future of starvation, of mass migration and unending heat waves that kill the elderly and children. It is a future of less prosperity for everyone; the global economy seems certain to shrink by the end of the century. It is a future of permanent scarcity in the shadow of the irresponsible now.
The time for small changes and the tightening of belts has passed. The 1997 Kyoto accord, signed before we were born, was a failure. So was Copenhagen after it. The time we have had to address the greatest threat humanity has ever faced was squandered by the generation before us. Every country on the planet, including Canada, has failed to meet its Paris goals. We are on track for a future that is unimaginably bleak, and by the time we feel the full weight of our choices it will be too late.
Related
Schools say parents must approve students leaving class for climate march( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/thousands-of-montreal-students-expected-to-join-climate-march )
Allison Hanes: Quebec students poised to strike over climate change( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-quebec-students-poised-to-strike-over-climate-change )
Hundreds of students skip school, rally for climate action in Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hundreds-of-students-skip-school-rally-for-climate-action-in-montreal )
Mulcair tells students Canada failing miserably on climate change( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/mulcair-tells-students-canada-failing-miserably-on-climate-change )
Montreal youth turn 'panic into action' with another climate march( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-youth-turn-panic-into-action-with-another-climate-march )
The generation before us has betrayed us. The generation before us has sacrificed their children to the idols of economic growth and global competition. The generation before us has dressed up some of the worst and most destructive ideas in human history as practical and innovative.
We are told by the generation before us that what we need to do is stick to the ideas that created the nightmare we will have to live in, because they are the only ideas. We are told that there is no alternative.
It is clear that our present economic system is driving us toward ruin and will continue to bring more emissions, causing more warming. Our farmland is being dried out and our water polluted. The victims of our actions are being treated as invaders, stopped at border checkpoints and held in detention camps for migrants. There must be an alternative.
Every child on Earth is being robbed of what the generation before us took for granted. The commons have been raided and left in ruin, and we are being asked to pay the price. That is why we walk out of class: because we know enough of what the generation before us has done and what needs to be repaid.
The youth of the world represent half of the global population. We will live in the ravaged wasteland left to us, and yet we have no say in the political process and there is no accountability in this system. That is why we are walking out of class and why we will continue. This is just the beginning and we will not stop until we do what is necessary.
We hope it will not be too late, if it already isn't.
Sara Monpetit is a Montreal high school student and climate activist. Léa Ilardo is a university student and the co-spokesperson of La planète s'invite à l'Université.

