Quebec City entrepreneur Peter Simons, one of the province's best-known fashion retailers, is in no rush to reopen his chain of stores.
Though his company has annual sales of more than $500 million, the Simons CEO says he's chosen safety over profits as he gears up for the May 19 reopening of his nine Quebec stores, including the downtown Montreal location.
Simons shared his thoughts by telephone Wednesday with the Montreal Gazette on how the pandemic is affecting the 3,000-employee company and the retail industry as a whole. The interview has been edited for length and clarity.
How have the last two months been for you?
It's been tough. We've had really long days, though I always try to take time to think of the good things that are happening at the company. It's a very stressful moment because the losses that come with closure have to be financed. At the same time, you're working to stabilize your business.
Entrepreneurs are used to looking into the future, but a crisis like this makes you focus on the next day, the next week - the things that are in front of you. It can just be to make sure that employee morale and mental health are solid, and that people are focused on the immediate challenges."
What was business like in mid-March when you shut your doors?
We were really excited. We had just gotten through the rail transportation shutdown, which disrupted our supply chain in January and February. It took enormous efforts to address that, and then we got hit with this. It was a little bit of a double whammy.
We were a couple of months away from putting into commission a new $200 million robotics distribution facility in Quebec City that represented the largest capital investment in our history. We had finished spending all the money in order to serve our stores and our e-commerce more efficiently. It was very bad timing for us. We're sitting on a dormant investment, so it's added an extra layer of challenge.
How has confinement impacted the online part of your business?
It was already an important part of the business. We've been investing massive amounts for the past 10 years. We run one of the top 10 fashion websites in the country, No. 2 in Quebec, with more than 60 million visitors annually, and we sell all over North America.
After the shutdown, we saw a major acceleration in online sales. That has helped enormously to weather the storm. It's been one of the positive pieces, but it hasn't been able to compensate completely for the store closures. It's brought oxygen to the company. Another bright spot is Fabrique 1840, our digital platform that supports Canadian artisans.
The downtown Simons location on Wednesday, on eerily quiet Ste-Catherine St. "It's too early to say" how the COVID crisis will affect malls, CEO Peter Simons says.
Is it fair to say consumers have woken up to the importance of buying locally?
We've seen this coming with our customers for a number of years. We started building Fabrique 1840 five years ago, and the trend has really taken shape during the crisis. There's been massive growth, a 10-fold increase. My dream is that Fabrique 1840 will become the destination for Canadian artisanal creativity. I would like to create wealth here in Canada, as opposed to me writing a cheque to some holding in Liechtenstein.
Customers are trying to support their local economy. There's an appreciation for quality and local retailers, and it's manifested itself in purchasing behaviour. Sometimes, the diamonds are in your own backyard.
This crisis will bring to bear a deep reflection about the companies that are there, creating jobs and contributing to the community. The customer is changing, and hopefully the politics and the legislation can change. There has to be political action in terms of accepting the impacts of the intangible economy, and passing legislation that makes it just.
There's obviously been a big move to e-commerce. Part of that will be sticky, meaning that people will adopt the new habit and keep it post-confinement. How much of it will stick? We're still reflecting on that. The change has been happening. This crisis has just accelerated it.
How will COVID-19 affect malls?
It's too early to say. Right now I'm just focusing on the experience of reopening, on taking care of our people and our clients when we reopen. We watch cash flow carefully. I work with some incredible people, some real warriors. People seem to be keen and excited to get back to work. I'll be out in the stores next week as some of the staff comes back for training and preparation. It's a big change, and I want to do it safely, the right way. We are going to start slowly. Better to walk and think than run and make mistakes.
ftomesco@postmedia.com( mailto:ftomesco@postmedia.com )
Related
Simons to expand to West Island with new Fairview Pointe Claire store
Simons CEO feels 'vindicated' as national expansion ushers in new era for retailer
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 6 here. All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews

