People in counties east of Ottawa should shut their doors and windows, says Chief Medical Officer of Health
? An acrid haze drifted over vast pockets of central Canada as the smoke from forest fires affected urban areas with millions of residents Monday.
In Montreal, Quebec City, and Ottawa, people reported the presence of heavy clouds and burning odours for several hours.
Some people were overheard saying that - because of the smell - they thought their home was on fire. Others described an impact on their breathing.
There are more than 50 forest fires burning in Quebec, including eight that remain out of control. About 40,000 hectares of forest have been ravaged over the last week, while residents of one central Quebec community have been evacuated.
The smoke was not expected to pose a risk to major populated areas, but people with breathing problems were still being warned to take precautions.
The chief doctor of Eastern Ontario issued an air-quality warning in his area, which covers several counties east of Ottawa to the Quebec boundary.
Medical Officer of Health Dr. Paul Roumeliotis urged people to shut their doors and windows Monday.
The doctor called it a health hazard to everybody, but especially young children, the elderly and people with chronic breathing problems.
Environment Canada said the wind was expected to shift northward away from Montreal by late-morning Monday.
About 1,200 firefighters, including some from Maine, New Brunswick, New Hampshire and western Canada are working to extinguish the flames.
One fire, about 300 kilometres north of Trois-Rivieres, forced about 1,300 people from a Quebec reserve to spend a fifth night away from home.
Thick pockets of smoke had drifted to Quebec City on Sunday, diminishing visibility at the city's airport to just one kilometre - less than one-25th of what visibility had been earlier in the day.
The smoke continued wafting southward and reached Montreal overnight. However, the air in the city had already begun clearing considerably by mid-morning Monday.
"The smoke, the smog, over the St. Lawrence region should be ending very soon," David Pelletier, of Quebec's civil security agency, said late Monday morning.
He said the smoke was headed back north. No further evacuations were expected Monday, but several other towns were placed on alert.

