A little over 12 hours after launching the season's fourth citywide snow removal operation on Sunday evening, Montreal officials reported Monday morning that 16 per cent of the 36 centimetres of snow that fell on the city since Saturday had been cleared.
That citywide average was echoed in borough level reports from Côte-des-Neiges/Notre-Dame-de-Grâce (the largest borough in the city) at 13 per cent, and in downtown Ville-Marie, at 14 per cent. However some other boroughs - because of a larger residential population or less traffic - were appearing to more than outstrip the the citywide average.
Outremont reported a 30-per-cent completion rate while Saint-Léonard claimed 27 per cent by midmorning.
However, seven of the city's 19 boroughs reported below average results thus far, with Lachine (9 per cent), Verdun (7 per cent) and Montreal North (3 per cent) at the bottom of the standings.
The city has said it could take more than five days before all streets and sidewalks are cleared, because in some boroughs, crews had not finished removing snow from the previous storm.
And city officials are reminding motorists and pedestrians to keep a safe distance between themselves and the fleet of snow-removal trucks and other vehicles used in the clearing of 4,100 kilometres of streets and 6,550 kilometres of sidewalks.
N.D.G. resident Alison Neill pushes the stroller carrying hers seven-month old daughter, Violet, over the uncleared snowbanks on Regent Ave. near Sherbrooke St., on Thursday.
Meanwhile, as Montrealers start their workweek with a morning rush hour temperature of minus 23 Celsius coupled with a windchill factor of minus 34, they'll also have to contend with a smog warning.
Environment Canada issued to the warning for Montreal, Laval, Longueuil and Châteauguay at 4:30 a.m. Monday, warning that the "levels of air pollutants will be high this morning."
Smog can affect asthmatic children and people with respiratory ailments or heart disease and it's recommended that they avoid intense physical activity outdoors until the smog warning is lifted.
Related
Allison Hanes: Wild winter heightens urge to hibernate( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-wild-winter-heightens-urge-to-hibernate )
CREDIT: James Mennie, Montreal Gazette

