Here's what happened while you were enjoying some rest.
An 80-year-old motorcyclist died after a tractor accident in St-Georges-de-Clarenceville, Montérégie( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/motorcyclist-80-dies-after-colliding-with-tractor ). According to preliminary information collected by the Sûreté du Québec, the collision occurred when the driver of the tractor entered Beech Road in a southerly direction, after having stopped at an intersection on Highway 202, a little before 2 p.m. The motorcyclist did not have a mandatory stop, according to the SQ.
Liberal Leader Philippe Couillard said the situation in storm-ravaged Gatineau highlights the importance of a comprehensive plan to fight climate change( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-election-gatineau-disaster-highlights-need-for-climate-plan-couillard-says ). Suspending his campaign for most of Saturday, Couillard travelled to Gatineau on Saturday morning to survey the damage from a tornado that touched down in the region( https://montrealgazette.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/tens-of-thousands-without-power-following-tornado-in-ottawa-region/wcm/8e9f41c6-00c7-4518-841f-b78c40a2a865 ). He was joined by Parti Québécois leader Jean-François Lisée( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec-election-lisee-reroutes-campaign-bus-to-visit-tornado-aftermath ). Coalition Avenir Québec Leader François Legault also visited the region Saturday. Returning to Montreal to meet reporters, Couillard defended his party's plan, saying it is the right approach, despite the fact the PQ and Québec solidaire are proposing more ambitious plans to fight climate change that each include a plan to fully electrify the transportation sector. He said: "If we want to go forward in the environmental file, it must be together with the public, so to tell Quebecers at that date you won't be allowed to own gasoline-powered vehicles is not the right way to do it, according to me. Ramming this through the public is not going to do anything for the environment. There has to be a public buy in."
A maze cut into a cornfield featuring the likeness of a former NASA astronaut has been photographed by a satellite orbiting Earth. The image of Oklahoma-born Thomas P. Stafford is cut into a 10-acre field at P Bar Farms in Hydro, about 100 kilometres west of Oklahoma City. The maze was created in partnership with the Stafford Air and Space Museum, named for the astronaut, in nearby Weatherford. A satellite photographed the tribute from its orbit 650 kilometres away. The 88-year-old Stafford is a Weatherford native whose space missions included commanding the Apollo flight that linked with a Soviet spacecraft in 1975. It was the first meeting of American astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts in space.
With files from the Associated Press.
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette

