Montreal director Arshad Khan has just returned from a theatre in Istanbul after taking in the Turkish première of his debut documentary feature Abu. On the surface, that might not seem like such a huge deal, except that Abu is an intensely personal film about Khan trying to reconcile with his fragmented Pakistani Muslim family and to grapple with sexual abuse within the family. And, oh yeah, it's also about his coming out as gay.
Needless to say, this would still be pretty controversial material in many Western countries. Even in a relatively more liberal Muslim country like Turkey, it's risqué.
This is the first time the multi-award-laden film has been shown in a Muslim country, and Khan didn't know what kind of response to expect.
"But, oh my God, the reaction was just amazing," Khan says in a phone interview. "I got ovations. People were crying. They were hugging me. They were telling me that everything I had gone through within the conservative and secular tug of war, they had gone through as well."
Abu - which opens Friday in Montreal - means father in Urdu. And it's Khan's abu who plays a pivotal role in the film.
ABU (Father) Official Film Trailer 2017( https://vimeo.com/206168265 ) from arshad khan( https://vimeo.com/arshadfilms ) on Vimeo( https://vimeo.com ).
Khan concedes he spent much of his life struggling to win his father's approval. It wasn't an entirely successful mission. It didn't help that his father had told Khan when he was a kid he would either bring him "great fame or great shame" - and his father was expecting the latter.
"It's really a miracle that this film got made at all, because, definitely, Pakistani families don't like to talk about themselves," Khan says. "I had huge struggles with this, because I didn't want to make an exploitative or a sensationalized film. And I didn't want to make a film about sexual abuse, because it's too hard and too personal, and I didn't want to share that with the world.
"I had to talk to my family (about everything) as I proceeded. There was re-edit after re-edit, because there were things they weren't OK with. There were a lot of compromises, but I still had to tell my story, and I did. But that's why it took me five years to make. The film was even more explosive before."
Suffice it to say, it's still pretty incendiary now.
"Actually, I had the hardest time with my mother, who felt the film was going to bring shame to the family. I told her it would bring just the opposite. She asked me why I couldn't make a film and use actors instead. So I said: 'Well, Mom, if I as a Pakistani brown man had those kinds of resources, don't you think I'd be making fiction films? No, I'm going to exploit my family instead, because that's all I have,'" cracks Khan, whose mother wasn't entirely amused with his rationale. "But it was never my intention to make her feel bad.
"When I was in film school, one of the first things I learned was to work with what you have. And our family had this huge, unbelievable wealth of images - videos and photos.
"So, with the encouragement of friends and my sister, I went ahead, even though many times I got cold feet and stopped. As my recent partner said to me: 'If your sister can be so brave, grow a pair of ovaries and move on.' So I did."
Khan's mother avoided taking in the first screening of the film, but caught it later at a Toronto festival showing.
"To my right at that screening, I had someone laughing all the way through and to my left, I had my mom crying all the way through," recalls Khan, whose dad had died a few years earlier.
"At the end, she said: 'Oh, it was not so bad, and it's even kind of funny in parts.' She then told me she was proud of me, and then came a flood of tears. Then I told her that the purpose of this film was not to demonize people, but simply to show who I am."
Khan grew up in Islamabad, but as a young man he moved with his family to Mississauga, before he settled solo in Montreal. Although he had worked a series of jobs - including a stint as a flight attendant - he had long been fascinated by film and was accepted into Concordia University's esteemed cinema program. In 2012, he won a top prize at school for his short documentary, Zen, about a young boy with cerebral palsy.
"Interestingly, my father had been obsessed with film his whole life. I recently came across a trove of letters he had written to my mother over the years, and in every one, he talks about his love for movies - be they about Clark Gable, Greta Garbo or Westerns. That passion has been passed down. That helps with a complicated grieving process and coming to terms with a parent with whom I had such a difficult relationship."
Khan plans to follow up Abu with a comedy - of sorts.
"Actually, it's more of a surreal, dark satire about Canada's war on terror in the aftermath of 9/11. I was very angry with the association with the word 'terror' and my identity. That's really why I first wanted to become a filmmaker."
bbrownstein@postmedia.com( mailto:bbrownstein@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/billbrownstein( http://twitter.com/billbrownstein )
Related
More stories on our Movies page( http://montrealgazette.com/category/entertainment/movies )
CREDIT: Bill Brownstein, Montreal Gazette

