OTTAWA - A 10-yard touchdown run by Williams Powell with 15 seconds remaining in regulation time carried the Ottawa Redblacks to a 24-17 victory over the Alouettes Saturday night before 25,161 spectators at TD Place.
The Redblacks, first in the East Division, improved to 5-3 while the beleaguered Als lost their fifth consecutive game, their record dropping to 1-7.
Als rookie quarterback Johnny Manziel, in his second game since being traded from Hamilton last month, displayed marked improvement, a strong arm and plenty of potential.
It wasn't enough to get Montreal into the win column, but at least Manziel didn't turn the ball over after being intercepted four times last week, against the Tiger-Cats.
Boundary cornerback Tommie Campbell was a surprise scratch by the Als, the move announced one hour before the opening kickoff. Both head coach Mike Sherman and general manager Kavis Reed said the player was dealing with a personal issue that couldn't be resolved in time.
The Als also were forced to play a man short when backup linebacker and special teams member Nicolas Boulay suffered a calf injury during the pre-game warmup.
Campbell was replaced by Branden Dozier.
The Redblacks offence, operating without a huddle throughout most of the night, drove the ball downfield on their opening possession. Montreal has had a tendency to allow touchdowns on the first series of games, and it appeared that would be the case again.
But with the ball at the Als' 41-yard line, J.C. Beaulieu fumbled. The fumble was forced and recovered by strong-side linebacker Chip Cox. Beaulieu, a former Alouette, was traded to the Redblacks for Patrick Lavoie last January.
On the Als' second series of the game, Manziel completed a 27-yard pass to Ernest Jackson. Tyrell Sutton also gained 16 yards on a draw. But Manziel was hit for a 13-yard loss after recovering his own fumble.
The Als scored a single point on Bede's punt at 10:35.
Montreal's defence created another turnover on the Redblacks' next possession.
Harris passed to Brad Sinopoli, but linebacker Chris Ackie forced the fumble and the ball was recovered by rush-end Ventral McMillan at the Montreal 35.
Manziel quickly found Jackson for another 27-yard gain. But two plays later, new receiver Adarius Bowman fumbled. The ball was recovered by Jonathan Newsome, who was removed prematurely from the six-game injured list for this game, as teams are permitted to do.
The opening quarter ended without any additional scoring, although Ottawa receiver Diontae Spencer was wide open and dropped what might have been a touchdown pass late in the period.
Bede conceded a safety early in the second quarter rather than attempting a punt out of the end zone for a 2-1 Ottawa lead.
On the next play, Montreal defensive-tackle Ryan Brown tipped a Harris pass at the line of scrimmage. The ball was intercepted by Ackie, who returned it 35 yards for a touchdown at 1:13, giving the Als an 8-2 lead.
It was the first interception return for a touchdown by a Montreal player since last Aug. 19, when Dominique Tovell turned the trick against Toronto.
Rookie kicker Lewis Ward narrowed the deficit to 8-5 with a 45-yard field goal at 11:06. Ward, an undrafted free agent, has missed only one field goal this season.
The Als made it 9-5 on a single after Bede was wide left on a 49-yard field goal attempt two minutes later. It appeared to be a low snap on the play.
The Redblacks engineered an impressive drive at the end of the half, thanks in part to a 22-yard pass to Greg Ellingson and a 10-yard gain to Dominique Rhymes.
Harris was hit for a nine-yard loss but then found Ellingson for an 18-yard gain to the Als' 12-yard line. Rather than attempt an easy field goal from there, Ottawa gambled on third-and-one.
Head coach Rick Campbell sent backup quarterback Dominique Davis into the game. He ran a bootleg, but his attempted pass to Marco Dubois was low and behind the receiver. The Redblacks turned the ball over on downs.
The home team opened the second half with a 12-play, 101-yard scoring drive. The key plays of the drive were passes of 19 yards to R.J. Harris and a 13-yard gain by Rhymes. William Powell also scampered for a 10-yard gain.
Harris eventually connected with Harris, the receiver, for a 14-yard touchdown at 6:16. Harris beat defensive-back T.J. Heath on the play. An attempted two-point convert failed, giving the Redblacks an 11-9 lead.
But the Als rebounded nicely, Manziel directing them on a six-play, 75-yard drive, thanks to some nifty running by the quarterback, who gained 11 and 13 yards on consecutive plays. He also found Jackson for a 12-yard gain.
Manziel ran 18 yards on a quarterback draw and was about to score, but Jonathan Rose forced the fumble after the rookie pivot took a vicious hit and hurt his neck. Fortunately for Montreal, centre Kristian Matte fell on the loose ball in the end zone for a touchdown at 9:33, giving the Als a 16-11 lead.
Bede then added a single on the ensuing kickoff.
But Ward tied the game, 17-17, in the fourth quarter on field goals from the 32 and 15.
Montreal's next game is next Saturday night, at Edmonton.
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1
Related
Als' Johnny Manziel getting used to being in the eye of CFL media storm( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/als-johnny-manziel-getting-used-to-being-in-the-eye-of-cfl-media-storm )
'You flush it and move on,' Als' Johnny Manziel says after horrid debut( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/you-flush-it-and-move-on-als-johnny-manziel-says-after-horrid-debut )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette