A court has ordered the city of Montreal to pay $28,000 to a woman who slipped on an icy sidewalk( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-to-unveil-new-plan-to-deal-with-icy-sidewalks ) and broke her ankle.
In a Nov. 19 judgment, Quebec Superior Court Justice Louis J. Gouin found the city should have spread abrasives( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-clearing-city-promises-to-do-better-this-year ) on the sidewalk "to avoid as much as possible the creation of ice sheets and thus minimize the risk of falling, especially on a sidewalk located near a school."
However, he also noted that the woman, who had been walking on sidewalks in the area for about eight minutes before the fall, "should have seen that there was no evidence of abrasives and she should have been more cautious."
On Jan. 20, 2016, Maude Vermette Saint-Cyr, a 24-year-old substitute teacher, was on her way to École Charles-Lemoyne in Pointe-St-Charles, part of the Sud-Ouest borough.
Just under eight centimetres of snow had fallen over the previous two days - 6.3 centimetres on Jan. 18 and 1.3 cm on Jan. 19. After getting off the métro, Vermette Saint-Cyr headed to the school, a minute walk away. No snow had fallen that day. It was cloudy and minus-9 Celsius.
Evidence presented in court showed that the city cleared the sidewalk after the Jan. 18 snowfall, but not after the one on Jan. 19. No abrasives were spread and the city documents indicated there were patches of ice on sidewalks in the area.
At 8 a.m., Vermette Saint-Cyr reached Grand-Trunk and Shearer Sts., on the block where the school is located. She slipped on ice and fell. A passerby flagged down a police car. The police officer told Vermette Saint-Cyr that no abrasives had been spread.
An ambulance took her to a hospital. Doctors performed surgery on her foot the next day and she was unable to return to work for four months. She can no longer ski or take long hikes. She still experiences pain due to her injuries.
In her lawsuit, Vermette Saint-Cyr demanded $85,000 in damages from the city to make up for lost wages, permanent partial incapacity and pain and suffering.
The city argued in court that "the sidewalk was in good condition, considering the climatic conditions."
Montreal contended that the fall was the woman's own fault, according to the judgment.
The city's lawyers told the judge that Vermette Saint-Cyr "neglected to take the necessary measures to ensure her own safety by ignoring the prevailing weather conditions in the days preceding the fall," the judgment says.
Justice Gouin found fault with both parties.
He ruled that the city should have spread abrasives on the sidewalk after clearing the snow( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/snow-removal ) on Jan. 18 or after realizing there were icy patches on Jan. 19.
Gouin found it was "rather surprising" that the city considers the sidewalk in question at the bottom of its list of snow-clearing and de-icing priority areas, despite the fact that it's near a school and is heavily used.
However, he ruled the woman should have known that there could be ice patches on the sidewalk, as they cannot be expected to be completely ice-free at all times.
"Such is our lot in the winter," the judge said.
Gouin calculated her damages to be $56,000. Since she was partially responsible for the incident, he awarded her half - $28,000.
In 2014, Montreal Gazette photographer Dario Ayala wrote about taking shots at people slipping on the ice - and how difficult that can be when your instinct is to help. Tap here to read that first-person account.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/photographers-help-too )
McGill University student Mayumi Louguet falls on a patch of ice created by overnight freezing rain on the corner of McTavish Sherbrooke Sts. in 2014.Related
Enter your winter weather cliché here: Mixed bag, cocktail, roller-coaster( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/enter-your-winter-weather-cliche-here-mixed-bag-cocktail-roller-coaster )
Watch: Montreal winter-driving guide( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-montreal-winter-driving-guide )
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )

