Winter-weary Montrealers basked in the sun Friday. As the temperature hovered around 0 C, some of the snow that fell the previous day melted, as did ice that has plagued many sidewalks and streets.
But the weather's about to get turbulent again. Freezing rain and regular rain are expected to fall on the weekend, followed by a return Sunday night to sub-zero temperatures and then snow and blowing snow on Monday.
Sitting in his office nine floors above McGill University's snow-covered campus, Christopher McCray was crunching Environment Canada numbers to quantify the weather whiplash Montrealers have been experiencing this winter.
McCray's conclusions will console Mayor Valérie Plante whose administration has faced an ice-rage backlash as it struggles to clear treacherous sidewalks and roads.
Related
Emergency calls for icy falls jump 55 per cent in 2019( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/emergency-calls-for-icy-falls-jump-55-per-cent-in-2019 )
They back up the mayor's contention that city workers and private contractors have faced an uphill battle( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-puts-ice-breaking-on-hold-as-it-goes-back-to-snow-removal ) against seesawing temperatures and a smorgasbord of precipitation.
"We've seen a lot more precipitation falling as rain than in other winters," said McCray, a PhD candidate at McGill's Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences who specializes in freezing rain.
And the rain has often been followed by cold snaps. "The big problem is the rain falls, melts some of the snow and you have a lot of water everywhere - and then after that the cold quickly comes in and it all freezes."
Here's a look at McCray's numbers:
RAIN
As of Friday, about 140 millimetres of rain had fallen since December. That's 30 mm more than the average rainfall between December and February over the past two decades.
Because of climate change, the amount of rain that falls in Montreal between December and February has been increasing by about 10 mm per decade, McCray said.
In the 1940s, only about 40 mm of rain fell in Montreal between December and February.
McCray said scientists know climate change is to blame in part because of climate simulations that look at what the rainfall pattern would be if there was no increase in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions.
"We also see a constant progression (in rainfall) that we can see since the 1940s at many different weather stations - not just Montreal but across southern Quebec," he added.
Rainfall (December to February). 1940 to 2019. Christopher McCray
TEMPERATURE
"The temperatures this winter have been very close to average, but you can get a very normal season with a lot of warm and a lot of cold, and it just kind of averages out," McCray said.
So to understand why Montreal is having so many ice-related problems, he looked at episodes where rain was followed by freezing temperatures.
So far this winter, there have been nine episodes where rain fell and then the next day the temperature stayed below freezing, likely causing the rain to freeze, he said.
That's double the average number of such episodes Montreal has experienced during a typical winter since the 1940s, McCray said.
There are fewer days when the temperature stays below freezing. Nighttime low temperatures are warming faster than daytime highs.
"What we might consider a slightly cold winter now is probably what an average winter was like in the 1970s," McCray said.
Winter is getting "noticeably shorter" in Montreal, he noted. The first 0 C day now tends to occur around Oct. 25, about two weeks later than it did before the 1990s.
SNOW
So far this winter, 194 centimetres of snow have fallen in Montreal - 36 cm more than the average snowfall by this time.
On average since 1980, Montreal has received about 205 cm of snow during an entire winter. Between 1950 and 1980, the average was about 240 cm.
Why is there more rain and less snow these days?
"The primary thing is that it's just warmer generally" due to climate change, McCray said. "When it's warmer at the surface, the snow will fall and then it'll melt before it reaches the ground."
Yearly snowfall, 1940 to 2019. Christopher McCray
FREEZING RAIN
Slightly more freezing rain than usual has fallen since December.
On average, Montreal experiences about 20 hours of freezing rain over six days between December and February. This winter, there have been 22 hours over 10 days, McCray said.
ariga@postmedia.com( mailto:ariga@postmedia.com )

