QUEBEC - The English Montreal School Board has dropped the idea of using federal funding from the Court Challenges Program to fund its challenge to Bill 21.
In a statement issued Thursday, EMSB spokesperson Mike Cohen said while the EMSB had made an application for funding and it had been accepted, it has not received any funding and thus has not spent any money in its litigation against the Quebec government.
Now it no longer wants it.
"The EMSB has renounced any funding it could receive from the the Court Challenges Program," the statement said. "That said, the EMSB maintains that its power of management and control conferred on it by Section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms covers the power to make agreements with third parties, including the government of Canada."
The statement adds: "Recent events do not affect the EMSB's resolve to see to an end to its important litigation attacking the constitutionality of Bill 21 and Section 477.1.1 of the Education Act."
The EMSB's change of view follows a storm of controversy over the funding issue.
On Thursday, Premier François Legault accused Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of insulting Quebecers in allowing federal funds to be used in a court challenge against Bill 21( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/bill-21 ), Quebec's state secularism law.
One day after the minister of immigration, Simon Jolin-Barrette, slammed Ottawa for allowing the English Montreal School Board to use money( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/emsb-receiving-250000-from-ottawa-for-high-profile-court-challenges ) from the federal Court Challenges Program (CCP) to challenge Bill 21, Legault went a step farther, pointing the finger directly at Trudeau.
"I think Justin Trudeau insults Quebecers in financing a challenge against this law banning religious symbols, which is supported by a majority of Quebecers," Legault said arriving for question period at the legislature.
"I ask Justin Trudeau to ensure this financing is not given to challenge Bill 21.
"It's shocking. I think it's unacceptable to see the federal government financing the EMSB to go against the will of the majority of Quebecers. It's insulting from Mr. Trudeau."
The Montreal Gazette confirmed Wednesday that the English Montreal School Board( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/emsb ) has received $250,000 in federal government funding from the CPP to help cover the legal costs of two court challenges it has filed against the Quebec government.
The CCP has awarded the board $125,000 to fund its challenge of Bill 21,( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/emsb-files-legal-challenge-against-bill-21 ) the state secularism law that bans teachers, judges and police officers, among others, from wearing religious symbols on the job.
The bill was adopted by the National Assembly in June 2019( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebec-passes-secularism-law-after-marathon-session ).
Legault dismissed out of hand Trudeau's explanation Wednesday that the Court Challenges Program is an independent agency that decides itself which cases it will finance.
"Listen, a government can put a framework around an institution," Legault said. "This is no small matter. We have an organization suing the government of Quebec for a bill adopted and supported by the majority of Quebecers.
"Mr. Trudeau can't hide behind an independent program."
He said his government and Justice Minister Sonia LeBel will look into possible options including taking away the EMSB's right to sue the government. The EMSB is currently under government trusteeship for governance issues but it retains the right to launch legal cases.
Legault did not elaborate.
"I will look at possible actions," LeBel said at a separate news conference earlier. "I will reflect. If there things we can do we will do them in due time but I won't discuss them in public."
But Legault is clearly irritated.
"This is no small matter," Legault said. "They are suing a national government, they are suing a government which adopted a law with the support of the Quebec nation. This is no small matter.
"It's not like other suits. I agree that we protect and financially help minority groups but I don't accept that the federal government finance a suit against a government."
The Parti Québécois also continued its attacks on the federal government.
The interim PQ leader, Pascal Bérubé, tried to table a motion in the legislature asking the National Assembly to condemn Ottawa's financing.
The CAQ government refused to grant consent to debate the motion so it died without being debated.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/philipauthier( https://twitter.com/philipauthier )

