Thick black smoke caused by forest fires that covered most of Quebec and clouded New York's skyline over the weekend is now headed to the Maritimes because of winds from the west.
Thick black smoke caused by forest fires that covered most of Quebec and clouded New York's skyline over the weekend is now headed to the Maritimes because of winds from the west.
"Over Montreal, and in the west of the province, it has cleared," Charlotte Leger, a spokeswoman for the forest-fire protection agency in Quebec, told globeandmail.com on Monday.
She said, however, that the provincial forest fire service has received reports of a haze over Quebec City and is still receiving calls from U.S. border states, although it is nothing like it was over the weekend.
Health officials in Montreal and in the entire state of New York state issued air-quality alerts for those with respiratory problems.
Because winds changed Monday, smoke is now drifting into the Maritime provinces.
Environment Canada has issued an advisory saying the smoke is already drifting across northern New Brunswick and will likely hit Prince Edward Island later Monday.
A spokesman said the smoke will result in reduced visibility and poor air quality.
Ms. Leger said there are still 33 active fires raging across the province, nine of them out of control.
Another six fires are being held by perimeters, she said.
"All of them are situated north in the province," Ms. Leger said.
The most severe one is north of Lac St-Jean, and has blackened about 650 square kilometres of forest.
In total this year, more than 200,000 hectares have been blackened in the province, she said.
On Monday, more than 500 firefighters were attacking the fires with water bombers whenever they had the chance, she said.
"It depends on the heat of the fire. The out-of-control ones, when the heat is so intense, it makes turbulence in the air, and you can't go overhead."
She said the 18 water bombers, along with more than 40 helicopters, will continue to fight the northern fires this week, being careful to observe the heat and smoke before heading in to drop water.
Hot, dry weather conditions are expected to continue until at least Thursday, Ms. Leger said.
"We really need a good rain."
In Saskatchewan, a fire that came within kilometres of Prince Albert is now under control.

