The city of Montreal's strategy to remove tonnes of snow dumped during a snow storm last week end slithered into a ditch Thursday morning, as a snowfall, freezing rain and incessant rain showers turned the removal operation into an ongoing attempt to literally keep pedestrians and motorists above water.
"All of our teams are at work to ensure the safety (of travellers) but the past few hours have brought a cocktail of weather that is making work difficult," Montreal mayor Valérie Plante wrote on her Twitter account. "The priority is to clear sidewalks, spread abrasives and unblock sewers."
Plante added that the city would "evaluate the situation on an hourly basis and adjust our interventions to the changing conditions. We ask that you exercise extreme caution no matter what your mode of travel."
The mayor's update comes less than 24 hours after city officials said the snow removal operation would be suspended pending expected showers of rain and freezing rain in order for the snow to absorb the precipitation.
But by Thursday morning that plan was clearly sinking as Montrealers woke up to Day 5 of a nightmarish weather cocktail that saw a sub-zero snowstorm on Sunday( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-61tJ ) followed on Wednesday by a day of snow and freezing rain that turned highways and streets into slush-filled quagmires, and then steady rain beginning early Thursday that turned all of the above into ice-sheeted streets and sidewalks with intersections like small ponds.
Even before Plante's update on Twitter, cracks were already beginning to appear in the snow removal strategy earlier on Thursday as Montreal executive committee chairman and Sud-Ouest borough mayor Benoit Dorais also took to Twitter to say that because of the school closures, many snow removal personnel in his borough were unable to come in to work. Dorais also noted that because of the rain's effect on local streets, clearing operations had been put on hold in order for abrasives to be spread on icy streets and for sewers to be cleared of snow so the accumulated water could drain.
All Montreal island school boards have cancelled classes and operations for Thursday while local road conditions( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/road-conditions ) range from dodgy to downright treacherous. Water accumulation is the major challenge for motorists, with vehicles of any size running the risk of aquaplaning if they suddenly hit water patches at high speed.
The intersection of Ste-Catherine and Metcalfe Sts. after a night of rain.
Weather( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/weather )-related accidents had already been reported on Highways 440 and 15 in Laval, the Ville-Marie Tunnel and Highway 20 in Ste-Julie on the South Shore. Water accumulation has also been reported on Highway 20 W. at the exit for 55th Ave. and on Highway 25 N. at Tellier St.
Montreal police( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/montreal-police ) said they had closed the exit at 55th Ave. because of the danger the water represented, and also reported a serious accumulation of water in the Atwater Tunnel. They also recommend that motorists and pedestrians think twice about leaving the house Thursday, at least until conditions on roads and sidewalks improve.
A city crew clears backed-up water from a bus stop at St-Joseph Blvd. and St-Urbain St. on Jan. 24, 2019.
Surface public transit on Montreal island is also suffering from the morning's rain. The Société de transport de Montréal is warning commuters to expect delays in bus service because of the road conditions, and that its buses may not be able to deploy their ramps allowing wheelchair access because of the accumulation of snow on sidewalks.
The transit authority also reported that because of the road conditions, bus lines #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm107 ) (Peel's hill), #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm94 ) (St-Joseph/Iberville), #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm45 ) (on Papineau between Rosemont and St-Grégoire) and #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm196 ) (55th Ave./St-Laurent) were being rerouted.
A parent and child walk home after learning school was cancelled in Montreal on Jan. 24, 2019.
As of 9 a.m., about three dozen flights out of Trudeau airport( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/montreal-pierre-elliott-trudeau-international-airport ) were listed as delayed. Power failures( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/hydro-quebec ) were reported in Montreal (2,715 clients affected), the Laurentians (8,869), Lanaudière (6,835) and Laval (3,737).
A woman salts her walkway on 9th Ave. in Montreal on Thursday, Jan. 24, 2019.Thursday's weather forecast( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-622L ) calls for rain changing to snow this afternoon with a high of 5 C, with the temperature falling to zero later this afternoon.
However, the forecast for Thursday evening doesn't bode well for anyone who has to commute home: snow will give way to local blowing snow, with a low of -17 C overnight.
A parent walks kids back from school after learning that Montreal schools were closed for the day on Thursday, Jan. 24, 2019.
Elsewhere in the province, the situation was equally daunting. Many parts of southern and eastern Quebec - particularly the Mauricie, Quebec City and Bas-Saint-Laurent regions - were being pelted by freezing rain, while rainfall warnings were issued for Sherbrooke and St-Georges.
This story will be updated.
Helene Beaulieu clears ice from her walkway near Chateaubriand Ave. and St-Zotique St. in Montreal on Thursday, Jan. 24, 2019.

