? Much of Ontario and large parts of Quebec are being battered by a massive winter storm that's whipping up icy winds and dumping near-record amounts of snow.
Environment Canada warned Sunday that the "hit and run" storm could drop up about 30 centimetres of snow in Ontario and as many as 60 centimetres in some areas in Quebec.
"It's a one-day wonder here for Ontario, that's the good news about it," said Environment Canada senior climatologist Dave Phillips.
Air travel was crippled Sunday by the storm and flights at Toronto's Pearson International Airport - the busiest in the country - were cut by 50 per cent. Most flights from the United States, but also from Ottawa, Windsor, London and Kingston, Ont., were cancelled and many international flights were delayed.
The Greater Toronto Airport Authority and airport authorities in Montreal were advising travellers to check ahead with their airline. VIA Rail said all trains were operating normally in Ontario and Quebec with some experiencing delays of about 30 minutes.
In Toronto, driving was treacherous as the visibility was low and the drifting snow slogged streets and sidewalks.
Brianne Tucker, a shop keeper in Toronto, spent most of the morning shovelling her side walk, but it was tough to keep up with the constant snowfall.
"I think I've seen the wind change about three different times just while having breakfast," said Tucker while shovelling snow.
She estimated that about four centimetres of snow per hour accumulated on her walkway.
"Personally, I'm loving it because I'm from the Arctic, so this is like going home. But it's definitely crazy."
Several scheduled events were cancelled, including a Santa Claus Parade in Innisfil, Ont., due to the deteriorating weather conditions.
Police were reminding drivers who ran into trouble to stay safely inside their cars.
A woman outside her vehicle on Highway 401 near Elgin Road in London, Ont., was hit and killed by a snow plow around 12:30 p.m., television station CP24 reported.
Weather warnings were issued for Ontario, southern Quebec and all of the Atlantic Provinces. There were reports of thunder and strong winds hitting some areas in southwestern Ontario and Toronto.
Other regions were bracing for the more of the same.
"It's going to have the Maritimes in its grips for most of tomorrow (Monday) and tomorrow evening into Newfoundland," said Mr. Phillips.
"When it finally just blows away up there in Newfoundland and out in the North Sea it will have created a lot of misery," he said.
"In Montreal we're seeing anywhere between 15 and 25 centimetres of snow today," said Mr. Phillips, adding that the city could get a total of 40 centimetres.
"Some areas in southern Quebec, particularly in the elevated areas - this could translate into more like 60 centimetres of snow," said Mr. Phillips.
In Atlantic Canada, weather warnings are in effect for most of the region.
The Monday morning commute could be especially tricky in northwestern New Brunswick, where up to 40 centimetres of snow is expected to fall today and overnight.
The rest of New Brunswick, and most of Prince Edward Island and mainland Nova Scotia will receive between 15 and 25 centimetres of snow today before changing to rain overnight.
A rainfall warning is in effect for southern Nova Scotia, which could receive up to 40 millimetres of rain.
Some areas in the Maritimes could see winds gusting up to 90 kilometres an hour, while winds gusting to 140 kilometres an hour are predicted for northwestern Cape Breton.
The same weather is expected to hit most of Newfoundland overnight and into tomorrow, with the western part of the province receiving the most snow. Storm warnings are also in place for eastern Labrador.
Despite all the problems expected in Canada, the brunt of the storm is staying south and hitting harder at the eastern seaboard of the United States.
Street and highway crews were at work trying to clear roads across the Great Lakes states into New England today as a storm blamed for three deaths spread a hazardous mix of snow, sleet and freezing rain.
The National Weather Service posted winter storm warnings from Michigan and Indiana all the way to Maine.
The storm canceled hundreds of flights at airports in Chicago, where Midway Airport measured 10 inches of snow by Sunday morning. No delays were reported at Boston's Logan Airport, but officials urged travelers to check with their airlines. Boston expected five to eight inches of snow, with heavier amounts likely in northern New England.
An estimated 103,000 customers were blacked out Sunday morning in parts of Pennsylvania, the utilities PPL and MetEd reported.

