Good morning. Here are some stories from the overnight news desk. Have a good one and mind the Montreal-area weather and traffic warnings below.
Rwanda somberly marks the start of genocide 25 years ago: Rwanda on Sunday somberly commemorated the start, 25 years ago, of its genocide in which some 800,000 people were killed, as the country continues to grapple with the lasting consequences of the mass killings. President Paul Kagame and first lady Jeannette Kagame laid wreaths and lit a flame at the mass burial ground of 250,000 victims at the Kigali Genocide Memorial Center in the capital, Kigali. Those attending the ceremonies included the leaders of Chad, Congo Brazzaville, Djibouti, Niger, Belgium, Canada, Ethiopia, as well as the African Union and the European Union. "I am moved beyond words at this memorial to tragedy," said Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission. There will be a procession through the capital to Kigali's National Stadium where are many as 30,000 are expected to participate in an evening candlelit ceremony. "Twenty-five years ago, Rwanda fell into a deep ditch due to bad leadership, today, we are a country of hope and a nation elevated," Agnes Mutamba, 25, a teacher who was born during the genocide told The Associated Press in Kigali.
From left to right, Chairperson of the African Union Commission Moussa Faki Mahamat, Rwanda's President Paul Kagame, Rwanda's First Lady Jeannette Kagame, and President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker, light the flame of remembrance at the Kigali Genocide Memorial in Kigali, Rwanda Sunday, April 7, 2019.
Animal welfare group evacuates 40 animals from Gaza zoo: An international welfare group is evacuating dozens of animals languishing in a ramshackle Gaza zoo to sanctuaries abroad. Vets and volunteers from Four Paws International loaded some 40 animals and birds Sunday and headed to the Israeli border in the northern Gaza Strip en route to resettlement in Jordan and Africa. The rescued animals include lions, foxes, monkeys and pelicans. It marks the fourth and largest Gaza rescue mission by the Vienna-based organization since Israel and Egypt imposed a blockade on the Palestinian enclave in 2007. The blockade and three wars between Israel and Gaza's Hamas rulers have made life dire for Gaza's 2 million residents, let alone its animals who were already mistreated. Some died of cold and hunger in makeshift zoos as keepers failed to provide adequate care.
Forty animals including five lions and this monkey are being rescued from squalid conditions in the Gaza Strip, an animal welfare group said. The zoo hit the headlines in February this year when the cash-strapped owner revealed he had declawed one of the lions there, so that customers could pay to play with her.
India restricts key Kashmiri highway to military use only 2 days a week: Authorities in India's portion of disputed Kashmir on Sunday began enforcing a ban on the movement of civilian vehicles on a key highway to keep it open exclusively for military and paramilitary convoys two days a week. Soldiers patrolled the highway and erected barricades by steel and razor wire at intersections with neighbourhood roads. India's government issued the order this past week, reserving a 270-kilometre (170-mile) stretch of the highway for the movement of government forces vehicles on Sundays and Wednesdays until the end of May. The order follows the Feb. 14 suicide bombing of a paramilitary convoy that killed 40 soldiers and brought rivals India and Pakistan to the brink of war. Civilian traffic was already being disallowed along the highway during the movement of troops' convoys after the attack. The order said the ban was called to prevent any attacks by anti-India rebels "keeping in view the large movement of security forces on the national highway" during India's multi-phase general election, which begins on Thursday.
Source: Associated Press
Related
Freezing rain warning issued for Montreal region Sunday night into Monday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/freezing-rain-warning-issued-for-montreal-region-sunday-night-into-monday )
Be aware of these traffic tie-ups on Sunday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/be-aware-of-these-traffic-tie-ups-on-sunday )
Côte-St-Luc "freedom rally" to join groundswell of anti-Bill 21 protests( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/politicians-organize-rally-against-bill-21-in-cote-st-luc )
Five things to do in Montreal this weekend: April 5-7( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/five-things-to-do-in-montreal-this-weekend-april-5-7 )

