In 2016, the end of December was dominated by "Worst Year Ever" memes.
It was a year of terror attacks, police shootings, Zika and Brexit. The year Bowie, Prince and Leonard Cohen died, the year Donald Trump was elected and "dumpster fire" became the phrase on everybody's lips. Then, the following year, a call for revision: 2017 was the worst. But those years and the two that followed were mere middling warm-ups for 2020, which feels less like a dumpster fire and more like a tire fire - or the Centralia mine blaze, a coal seam fire that turned a Pennsylvania city into a ghost town and that isn't expected to finish burning for another 250 years.
We can't afford to put 2020 behind us. The lessons have been too painful, and the COVID-19 infection numbers too dire. Here in Quebec, they are the worst they have ever been. With two approved coronavirus vaccines, it might feel like the end is in sight, but things will almost certainly get worse before they get better.
If the holiday shutdown doesn't flatten the curve, many dread that schools and non-essential businesses will be closed beyond Jan. 11. Others, like myself, have the opposite fear: that the shutdown, coming too late, is too short to significantly reduce daily case numbers. But no matter when schools and businesses reopen in 2021, the Quebec government must mandate masking for all grade levels in schools and in offices, since - as absurd as it feels to be spelling this out in the final week of 2020 - sitting at a desk is no protection from an airborne virus. Huge masking exemptions at schools and workplaces facilitate rampant community transmission and are undermining the real sacrifices being made by millions of Quebecers.
By June, half of Canadians may well be vaccinated. By the end of the July, Osheaga could even happen and Montreal's summer of 2021, with its promise of safer outdoor gatherings, has the potential to be truly glorious. And in the fall, things might finally return to some semblance of normal - but only if we are not still traumatized by the tragedy of a worsening second wave.
One good thing we can count on for 2021: Inauguration Day in the United States, Jan. 20, when the Trump presidency's daily assault on civil norms and its relentless insinuation on the consciousness of Canadians will come to an end. I can't wait to reclaim the part of my brain that has been unwillingly preoccupied by the fear of an impromptu, tweet-instigated nuclear war.
Other 2021 aspirations: I hope more artists I like release lockdown albums. I hope we can keep up our new-found pandemic passions for birding, for gardening, for sourdough baking, for not catching communicable diseases. I hope that when cultural events are finally happening again in person, they remain available via Zoom for those who live elsewhere or who would prefer to attend virtually. It has been an amazing year for sharing Montreal literary readings and musical events with the rest of Canada, and a unique opportunity for all Canadians, rural and urban alike, to attend cultural events right across the country.
Likewise, I hope the adaptations we have made for online learning and working from home will continue to improve accessibility and offer flexibility for students and employees.
I hope that we continue to recognize the precious value of caregivers and educators and artists.
I especially hope that the movement for universal basic income, which gained traction throughout the pandemic, continues to grow momentum and soon becomes a reality in Canada.
But prognostication in this era can't afford to avoid the negative. We should look at what the finance world calls "grey swans," known unknowns that are highly probable yet still vaguely unpredictable - like, say, a pandemic-level virus - that have the potential for huge global impact. In 2021, we ought to prepare for more fallout from growing income inequality, for the possibility that the food crisis already underway might sharply worsen, and for further climate-change events such as devastating hurricanes and killer heat waves.
Will Trump, cast out of the White House, begin tweeting in 2021 to his MAGA crew about the reality of aliens? Very possibly. Will we be seeing more discombobulating commercials for banks or lingerie set to '60s political anthems, now that Bob Dylan has sold the rights to his songwriting catalogue? Almost a certainty. Will the hardships of this past year eventually lead to a bon vivant era of indulgence, a modern roaring '20s? I think the chances are excellent. Will the seeds of change planted in 2020 - for action on racial justice, decarbonization, an improved social safety net - start to yield real policy results in 2021? Only if we can hold onto their urgency.
Because there's one 2020 lesson we have learned perhaps more thoroughly than any other: we have no idea what's coming next.
Related
Nawaz: Time for the Quebec government to get a grip on COVID-19 reality
Nawaz: Sleepwalking through a year of pandemic dreams
Nawaz: Amid COVID-19, a reminder of our other disasters

