The storm's effects in the region are expected to last through Monday, with some wind and rain lingering into Tuesday
Up to 180,000 homes were without power in Quebec on Sunday as hurricane Irene steamed northward as a tropical storm that forecasters cautioned still had enough punch to cause flooding and wind damage by the time it reaches Eastern Canada.
Hydro-Quebec said most of the outages were in the Montreal area as the outer fringes of the massive downgraded hurricane brought heavy rain and winds gusting to 90 kilometres an hour to the area despite still be centred over New England.
Chris Fogarty, director of the Canadian Hurricane Centre in Halifax, said Irene was expected to push fully into the Maritimes and eastern Quebec late Sunday and into Monday.
He said the heaviest rainfall was expected in Quebec while high winds and pounding surf were more of a concern in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.
"The heaviest rainfall is occurring in the Quebec region - the Eastern Townships - and with the water levels already particularly high there, that (flooding) is going to be the concern," he said.
Fogarty said rainfall amounts could approach 100 millimetres in some areas of eastern Quebec and parts of northwest New Brunswick.
St. Stephen, N.B. saw 35 mm of rain fall in little over an hour early in the morning. Eastern Quebec - including Quebec City, Sherbrooke, and the Eastern Townships - and western New Brunswick are expected to receive 50-100 mm of rain over the course of the day.
Western Nova Scotia and areas around the Bay of Fundy, meanwhile, have a tropical storm warning and will see wind gusts of up to 120 km/h.
Grand Manan, an island just south of the New Brunswick mainland in the Bay of Fundy, and Yarmouth, on Nova Scotia's southwestern tip, are expected to receive the worst battering.
The storm's effects in the region are expected to last through Monday, with some wind and rain lingering into Tuesday. By Monday evening, Irene's centre is expected to be over Quebec's Gaspé Peninsula.
Its reach is so wide that cities as far west as Ottawa could see heavy rains by Monday. Bursts of wind and rain are expected to hit Labrador, but not nearly with the same intensity as the Maritimes and southern Quebec.
Follow the Weather Network on Irene in Quebec and the Maritimes
Irene's intense conditions have caused numerous flight cancellations. Porter Airlines, which flies out of Toronto Island's Billy Bishop airport, cancelled all Boston and Newark flights on Sunday. The company has asked passengers flying to Quebec City, Montreal, Halifax, Moncton and St. John's, N.L. to check the status of their flights before heading to the airport, as they too might be cancelled.
About two dozen flights out of Toronto's Pearson International Airport had been cancelled for Sunday by noonhour - many to New York, but some even to Detroit and Minneapolis. No flights to Atlantic Canada had been cancelled at that hour.
Both WestJet and Air Canada are warning passengers travelling to storm-affected areas, including Atlantic Canada, that their flights may be delayed or cancelled.
Mr. Fogarty said that after Irene's rainfall passes through the Maritimes, the wind will remain - meaning some areas could see a sunny day with wind gusts up to 100 km/h.
Wind warnings have been issued for much of the region, including Western Nova Scotia and areas around the Bay of Fundy. Irene will reach peak intensity in these areas around 11 p.m. Sunday night. Mr. Fogarty said these regions, when at high tide, are at the biggest risk for flooding.
On Saturday, Irene was a Category 1 hurricane, the lowest designation on the scale, but changed in shape as it moved north, Mr. Fogarty said, becoming a post-tropical storm by Sunday afternoon.
A post-tropical storm is greater in area but weaker in intensity than a hurricane, he said. Rather than high-intensity winds near the centre of the storm, it is spread out among the storm system. The nature of the storm is such that rain will be heavier on the west side of Irene's track of movement, while wind will be heavier in the east.
"The highest winds near the centre of the storm are not nearly as intense as they are down in the tropics," Mr. Fogarty said.
When viewed by satellite, Mr. Fogarty said, a post-tropical storm looks more like a wintertime blizzard, more comma-like in shape than a concentrated hurricane.
Despite the classification, Environment Canada - which oversees the Canadian Hurricane Centre - has issued a tropical-storm warning for the Bay of Fundy area, "just to make people a little bit extra aware of the potential for higher winds," Mr. Fogarty said.
The Canadian Hurricane Centre monitors coastal weather even before hurricane season, predicting how major storms will change as they approach Canada.
With files from the Canadian Press

