Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue presented its 2018 budget for consideration last week. The meeting to officially adopt the $17.9 million operating budget took place after the West Island Gazette deadline, Tuesday.
The numbers presented for consideration were as follows:
The $17.9 million operating budget is down 0.52 per cent, or $93,844, from 2017.
For a residential property, the mill rate increased 2.1 per cent to 0.9148 per $100 in valuation in 2018 from 0.8960 per $100 in valuation in 2017. Do the calculations using the average price of a home - $379,489 - and the tax rate hike translates into the homeowner paying $79.62 more in 2018.
Like all other West Island municipalities that pay the Montreal Agglomeration Council for shared services, Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue was left scrambling at the last minute after Montreal announced an average 5.3 per cent hike in agglo fees earlier this month. Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue was the only suburb to experience a drop in agglo payments, but the drop was not as deep as the town had expected, so last-minute adjustments had to be made.
"If the agglo had done what it had said it would do, the (tax-rate hike) would have been lower, around 1.7 per cent," Mayor Paola Hawa said.
Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue Mayor Paola Hawa.
It was during a study of the fiscal impact the transfer of the Ste. Anne Hospital from federal to provincial jurisdiction would have on Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue that a glitch in the agglo formula which calculated the theoretical land wealth of a municipality was uncovered. That glitch meant the majority of the suburbs had overpaid the agglo for years. A more equitable equation was put in place and it was decided that the suburbs would be credited over three years. The credit for Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue ended up being $284,287 less than had been previously calculated.
"It's a case of give with one hand and take away with the other," Hawa said. "We negotiated with the province and the city for two years to come up with the new formula. And then, lo and behold, they take away our lunch money. I am very upset about it. Our compensation (for the transfer of the hospital) runs out in 2019. (The credits) were supposed to hold us over until we could build on (hospital-adjacent) land and begin to generate revenue."
(The transfer of a piece of developable land near the hospital was part of the hospital-transfer deal.)
Spring flooding last year also put a strain on the town's coffers, to the tune of $180,000. There is now a $10,000 flood reserve in place and the mayor said they would be holding information sessions in March to help citizens prepare for the possibility of flooding. The town has also applied for a federal grant which would pay 50 per cent of costs connected to coming up with long-term plans to deal with the impact of climate change.
"We'll talk about everything from how to properly stack sandbags to what kind and how many pumps a homeowner should have," Hawa said. "And we will ask everybody to register for our Code Red program. One of the problems we had last spring was getting in touch with everybody."
The three-year capital investment plan sees $5.2 million in projects for 2018, including $326,250 to be invested in various park upgrades, $750,000 of work planned for the replacement of underground electrical cables along Blvd. des Anciens-Combattants and $840,000 of underground water-pipe work on Legault St.
Hawa said two priorities for 2018 are preparing a Special Planning Program for the transferred hospital land and the moving forward of the project to extend Morgan Blvd. The extension is necessary in order to be able to develop land north of Highway 40.
kgreenaway@postmedia.com( mailto:kgreenaway@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Kathryn Greenaway, Montreal Gazette

