Look up.
With freezing rain changing to rain, and milder temperatures forecast until a return to the deep freeze this weekend, snow accumulation on roofs, awnings and car shelters could become a problem.
The Régie du Bâtiment du Québec( https://www.rbq.gouv.qc.ca/citoyen/penser-securite-a-la-maison/deneiger-et-deglacer.html ) is warning property owners to pay special attention to snow that may have accumulated on the roofs. The rain could make that snow even heavier and risk caving in a roof, the authority said.
If a lot of snow has accumulated, it's a good idea to remove it, but the RBQ recommends hiring a professional to do the work.
Also, with all the snow piled on the roofs of high buildings, there could be large chunks falling to the ground as the temperature warms up.
All the rain could make the roads and sidewalks icy late Friday when temperatures are expected to plummet to -10 C and the rain will change to snow.
Environment Canada issued a special weather statement on Thursday( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67 ) warning that there could be significant snowfall for southern, central and eastern Quebec, and the snow could be mixed with ice pellets or freezing rain over the southernmost areas.
The bone-chilling cold will return this weekend, with a high of -10 C forecast for Saturday, and highs of -18 C expected for Sunday and Monday.
Snow clearing not completed
It looks like the city might not finish clearing Monday's snow before the next dump. About 66 per cent of the streets had been cleared by 2 p.m.
A total of 30 centimetres fell between the new year and last Monday, leaving high snowbanks all over the city.
According to the city's snow clearing website( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/snowremoval/avancement ), Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce was slowest at snow removal, with 48 per cent of roads cleared by 2 p.m. St-Léonard leading the pack with 90 per cent of their roads cleared.
If you're out of town and are dreading this weather, you could change your flight free of charge if you are booked with Air Canada. The airline has offered to waive change fees to anyone travelling to or from Montreal, Ottawa and Toronto between Thursday and Sunday. If you're flying, check the Aéroports de Montréal website( http://www.admtl.com/en ) before heading out.
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

