A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Frank Zampino preliminary inquiry begins( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/frank-zampino-preliminary-inquiry-begins )
The preliminary inquiry began on Monday for Frank Zampino, the former No. 2 politician at Montreal city hall, and others who are accused of participating in a system of awarding municipal engineering contracts in exchange for kickbacks in the early and mid-2000s.
The hearing, which is under publication ban, is to continue on Friday. The media are not permitted to report any evidence heard at the hearing because of the publication ban.
Zampino was chairman of the city executive committee and right-hand man to three-term mayor Gérald Tremblay from 2002 to 2008.
Zampino was arrested by Quebec's anti-corruption squad, UPAC, in September along with former political fundraiser Bernard Trépanier, former Montreal civil servant Robert Marcil and five former heads or employees of engineering consulting firms.
One of the engineers, Yves Théberge, formerly of CIMA+, has since pleaded guilty.
They were arrested under a branch of a broader investigation into municipal corruption in Montreal, dubbed Fronde.
The accused face one charge each of municipal corruption, fraud and conspiracy to commit fraud. Zampino and Marcil each face an additional charge of abuse of trust by a public officer.
Montreal unveils resiliency strategy( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-unveils-resiliency-strategy )
From flooded neighbourhoods to drivers stranded all night on a highway in a blizzard, Montreal has had its share of events that show what happens when a community is not prepared for emergencies.
Mayor Valérie Plante said on Monday the city now has a strategy for dealing with extreme weather and other unforeseen events, from train derailments to terrorist attacks.
"We're very well prepared, that's for sure," Plante said at a press conference at city hall where she unveiled Montreal's resilient city strategy.
In 2014, Montreal was the first city in Canada to join 100 Resilient Cities, a movement pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation, she noted. Calgary, Toronto and Vancouver jumped on board the next year.
In addition to emergencies, the strategy also addresses poverty, inequality and aging infrastructures.
Actions so far have included promoting awareness of emergency preparedness, setting up the Centre for the Prevention of Radicalization Leading to Violence, identifying emergency shelters across the city, promoting urban agriculture and revising urban planning to mitigate flood risks.
Daughter of Mom Boucher faces new charges( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/daughter-of-mom-boucher-faces-new-charges )
The daughter of former Hells Angels leader Maurice (Mom) Boucher was arrested by the Sûreté du Québec on Saturday, a little more than a month after she was sentenced to house arrest for being in possession of cash generated by a major drug-trafficking ring linked to the biker gang.
Alexandra Mongeau, 28, appeared before a judge Monday afternoon at the Longueuil courthouse where she faces two charges alleging she was driving while impaired in Candiac. She was ordered to remain detained for a bail hearing to be held on Tuesday.
On May 11, Mongeau pleaded guilty to being in possession of cash collected by drug dealers who were part of a network that sold drugs in eastern Montreal. According to a summary of facts read into the court record, Mongeau was paid a cut (referred to as rent or taxes) of the profits on drugs sold in the Mercier-Hochelaga-Maisonneuve borough between 2011 and 2015. Her cut worked out to $1,000 per month and came from traffickers who sold drugs like cocaine in neighbourhoods her father ruled over when he was the leader of the Hells Angels in Montreal during the 1990s.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

