QUEBEC - The province wants to help Montreal obtain enough face masks to make travel by public transit as safe as possible given the COVID-19 pandemic, Premier François Legault said Wednesday.
And Quebec has announced plans to allow citizens to practise individual non-contact sports this summer such as golf, tennis, running, cycling and day fishing. The ban on such activities will be lifted as of May 20.
In a whirlwind day at the National Assembly, which sat for the first time since March 17, Legault used his pandemic briefing to respond to a flood of criticism that the government is not obliging Quebecers to wear protective face coverings - especially on public transit.
The furthest Quebec will go is to "strongly recommend" citizens wear masks of some sort when they leave their homes.
On the other hand, Legault said he is also worried the government's decision to gradually lift elements of the lockdown in Montreal will increase the number of people using the métro and bus system.
"Masks are going to become really important," Legault said, adding he wants to help Montreal in any way he can.
"But we have to be sure quality masks are available before thinking about rendering them mandatory."
That, in fact, is the real problem - bigger than than legal questions.
With 500,000 people riding the métro every day, Quebec would need tens of millions of quality masks. It is unlikely sufficient supply can be found. Legault hopes Quebec suppliers will come forward.
Earlier, answering a question from interim Parti Québécois leader Pascal Bérubé in the legislature calling for mandatory masks, Legault said the inventory Quebec has in stock now has to go first to healthcare workers.
"If, in the coming days - and we're working hard on this - we have enough masks to give them to all those using public transit, then we could have this discussion," Legault said.
"Unfortunately right now, even if we're working very hard, there is not the availability of the masks we would need."
On Wednesday, a new SOM-Cogeco poll revealed 89 per cent of Quebecers believe masks should be obligatory on public transit.
Masks were not Legault's only problem Wednesday. He also expressed frustration that Quebec has not yet hit the 14,000 tests a day target it set two weeks ago. It is still hitting only about 9,000 a day.
"I just want to tell you I don't accept this," Legault said. "I am not happy and I have told the people who are responsible. It means we need to be better organized, it means we need to better inform the population in different neighbourhoods."
Quebec Justice Minister and Minister Responsible for Canadian Relations and the Canadian Francophonie Sonia Lebel speaks to an Opposition MNA while the cleaning crew prepare the room for the next question period.
The death toll continues to rise in Quebec. Legault reported 89 new deaths Wednesday, bringing the total to 3,220.
Quebec still lags in explaining in detail who is sick and dying, Legault conceded. The list of CHSLD's considered hot spots has not been updated since May 1 despite repeated requests from citizens and the media.
Both Legault and Health Minister Danielle McCann said they plan to correct that situation in short order with McCann saying the new update will show some improvements.
Legault, however, revealed that 5,139 seniors in 332 residences are now infected. Eighty per cent of Quebec's COVID-19 deaths have been in public and private seniors' residences.
Legault also announced he will be in Montreal Thursday and Friday for the first time in two months. He will meet with Mayor Valérie Plante and said he wants to see first-hand how officials are handling the pandemic.
Wednesday also marked the first day opposition politicians were able to address questions on the handling of the pandemic directly to Legault's government.
Among the first on her feet was the new leader of the Liberal official opposition, Dominque Anglade.
After congratulating the government for its initial response to the pandemic, Anglade said its more recent response has been error-prone and incoherent. She specifically asked why Quebec, with 23 per cent of Canada's population, has 60 per cent of all COVID-19 deaths.
"That is the equivalent of municipality of Saint-Tite," Anglade fired across the floor.
But there was a solemn tone in the day, too. MNAs observed a moment of silence for the victims of the virus, while the flag of the legislature was lowered to half-mast for the day.
pauthier@postmedia.com
Twitter.com/philipauthier
Related
Gloomy COVID-19 projections put Legault on the defensive
Analysis: As COVID-19 rages, Montreal and Legault are both in turmoil
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 13 right here All our coronavirus-related news can be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

