EUROPE
BOSNIA: NEW GOVERNMENT
Bosnia is to have its first non-nationalist central government in more than 10 years, after deputies of the federal Parliament approved a new government made up of representatives of multi-ethnic and reformist parties. The three main nationalist parties that have dominated politics in the Muslim, Serbian and Croatian regions will be excluded. Carlotta Gall (NYT)
CROATIA: EX-GENERAL DENIES CHARGES
A war crimes suspect, former Gen. Mirko Norac, appeared before a court in Zagreb and denied allegations that he was involved in the 1991 killings of Serbian civilians. General Norac, 33, who gave himself up after two weeks in hiding on the condition that he would not be transferred to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, was remanded in custody until March 11. Carlotta Gall (NYT)
BRITAIN: CONCERN OVER KURDS
Concerned about the flood of refugees from France, Home Secretary Jack Straw telephoned his French counterpart, Daniel Vaillant, left, to ask him to help ensure that the 900 Iraqi Kurds shipwrecked on the Riviera did not try to travel to Britain. Many of the Kurds, who have been freed so they can file asylum applications in France, seem more interested in trying to settle in Germany and Britain, which have larger Kurdish populations than France does. Sarah Lyall (NYT)
BRITAIN: FOOT-AND-MOUTH PLEA
Officials continued to search for the source of the foot-and-mouth disease that struck pigs and cows in Essex, keeping five farms under quarantine and urging the public to avoid areas where livestock live and graze, lest they spread the disease to other animals. No new cases have been reported. Sarah Lyall (NYT)
UKRAINE: KUCHMA FIRM
President Leonid Kuchma said he would not comply with opposition demands that he resign over allegations that he ordered the kidnapping of a journalist, later found dead, and that he manipulated the 1999 election in which he won a second term. ''More than 16 million people voted for me, and I do not have the right to betray them,'' he told the newspaper Fakti. Meanwhile, opposition deputies failed to carry a motion of no confidence in Prosecutor General Mikhailo Potebenko, accused of mishandling the investigation into the journalist's killing. Patrick E. Tyler (NYT)
MIDDLE EAST
YEMEN: DEATH TOLL RISES
Six people were killed in postelection violence, raising the toll since the vote on Tuesday to 16, government and opposition officials said. Yemen's first municipal elections, combined with a referendum on extending the terms of the president and members of Parliament, have been marred by violence and opposition charges of widespread irregularities. (Reuters)
AFRICA
CONGO: PULLBACK AGREED
Ministers of all the African nations involved in the war in Congo welcomed a United Nations Security Council resolution that sets up a phased pullback and withdrawal of foreign and rebel troops in the country. The 15-to-0 Council resolution ended two days of talks with ministers from nations with troops in Congo: Zimbabwe, Angola and Namibia on the side of Congo, and Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi in opposition. Barbara Crossette (NYT)
ZIMBABWE: JOURNALIST LEAVES
A Uruguayan journalist ordered out of Zimbabwe left for South Africa, saying she would fight to return and accusing the government of repression. ''This is part of the general onslaught, the wave of repression that is turning Zimbabwe into a country very much like Albania under Stalinist rule,'' said Mercedes Sayagues, of The Mail & Guardian in South Africa. A BBC reporter left on Monday after being ordered out. (Reuters)
ASIA
INDIA: 3-MONTH CEASE-FIRE
Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee said the third extension of India's unilateral cease-fire in Kashmir, which began in November, would last three months, rather than one, apparently to remove the incentive for a monthly cycle of attacks intended to provoke India. Celia W. Dugger (NYT)
SRI LANKA: REBELS EXTEND TRUCE
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, fighting for a separate homeland since 1983, extended their unilateral cease-fire, which began on Christmas Eve, for an additional month. They appealed to the United States, Britain, the European Union and India to press Sri Lanka to reciprocate. President Chandrika Kumaratunga has said she will consider a cease-fire only after peace talks have begun. Celia W. Dugger (NYT)
INDONESIA: DEADLY CLASHES
The government sent hundreds of police officers and soldiers to Kalimantan, where more than 100 people have died in clashes between Dayak tribesmen and settlers. The police said the violence centered on Sampit, a commercial hub, where witnesses reported widespread rioting, looting and beheadings. Since 1999, thousands have died in attacks on Madurese settlers by Malays and Dayak tribesmen, who resent the outsiders. A navy boat is scheduled to arrive in Sampit today to remove refugees. Calvin Sims (NYT)
THE AMERICAS
CANADA: BALLOT REVIEW DENIED
The Supreme Court has turned down a bid by a Montreal newspaper to review thousands of rejected ballots from the extremely close 1995 referendum on Quebec independence. The Montreal Gazette, the largest English-language paper in the largely French-speaking province, has tried for several years to see 86,501 ballots that were not counted because of irregularities. Separatist officials have been accused of indiscriminately rejecting the votes of English-speaking Quebecers. In 1995, the secessionists were defeated by 54,288 votes. Anthony DePalma (NYT)

