The engaging new Glen House has two personalities: romantic and laid-back, or energetic and sporty.
This mountain lodge is a woodsy and peaceful year-round getaway, surrounded by the vast wilderness of the White Mountain National Forest of New Hampshire.
The Glen House also is at the centre of thrilling outdoor activities, notably downhill skiing and snowboarding at Wildcat Mountain, cross-country at Great Glen Trails and adventures around the awesome massif, Mount Washington.
At nearly 2,000 metres above sea level, it is the highest peak in eastern North America and it is a draw for ice climbing, backcountry skiing and mountaineering( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/brownstein-focus-fitness-paramount-for-navigating-citys-sidewalks-mountain-climber-says ), especially on legendary Tuckerman's Ravine, and unique sightseeing by car, on foot or on a tour bus, through four climates zones to the summit.
Close to nature: The hotel's panoramic windows open onto views of this phenomenon and the peak is a mesmerizing sight from sunrise to sunset, and even in the moonlight.
The Glen House property is an idyllic scene, with skiers and walkers cruising along trails, meadows and footbridges. Even in winter, the outdoor terrace, with its fire pit and lounge chairs, is popular for drinks and conversation.
"The hotel is so in sync with our exceptional environment," said April Jacobs, The Glen House sales manager. "It's truly authentic, with the murals of historic scenes, the superb views, the nature-inspired décor and our connection to outdoor life."
The new Glen House displays "nature-inspired décor and our connection to outdoor life."
The look: Three previous Glen House hotels have commanded this scenic spot since 1852, and this new version that opened in autumn 2018 invokes the timeless New England look of clapboard with white balconies and trim. It is already a contemporary country classic.
Named one of the most beautifully designed spaces in New Hampshire by Architectural Digest, the hotel's Great Room has soaring ceilings and a wall of windows opening onto Mount Washington, which is just "next door."
The Notch Grille combines a family-friendly tavern, a fireplace lounge and a dining room. It's warmly wrapped in textures and colours of the earth - vibrant reds, mossy greens and dusky browns on leather seating, kilim rugs and barn wood floors.
The 68 rooms are spacious and comfortable, with sofas, 55-inch TVs, honey-coloured furniture, good lighting, and large windows with mountain or forest views.
The Glen House also is environmentally conscious, operating a geothermal system for heating and cooling, as well as using hydro and solar power, and recycled wood for building.
Eat/drink: The Notch Grille is a hit with locals and visitors. It serves craft beer such as Autoroad Ale by Tuckerman's Brewery, and signature cocktails like the Autoroad Mule, with ginger beer, maple syrup and Glen House Vodka, a limited edition by Tamworth Distilling.
The kitchen dishes up excellent American comfort cuisine, using regional ingredients including Atlantic seafood (the seacoast is only a two-hour drive away). For indulgent breakfasts, there are buttermilk pancakes with blueberry compote, eggs Benedict or veggie-apple hash with tofu.
The lunch-to-dinner menu features crab cakes, flatbread with forest mushrooms, vegan shepherd's pie, burgers, beef bourguignon, baked haddock, lobster mac 'n' cheese and salads with steak tips.
The mountains: The Mt. Washington Summit Road Company owns Glen House, so guests enjoy discounts at the Mt. Washington Auto Road (summer) and the Mt. Washington SnowCoach. And guests also have free access to the Great Glen Trails Outdoor Centre, which has exceptional Nordic skiing on 45 kilometres of trails, plus fat-biking, snowshoeing and tubing.
For downhillers, the adventurous, edgy Wildcat Mountain is about two kilometres away and The Glen House offers lift-ticket packages to this downhill treasure. Readers of Ski Magazine rank Wildcat in the top 10 in the East for character, value and challenge, and No. 1 for scenery. "The Cat" has a 645-metre vertical drop, about the same as Tremblant, and several trails from summit to base, with a super-high-speed quad chair taking seven minutes to the top.
rochelle@rochellelash.com( mailto:rochelle@rochellelash.com )
IF YOU GO
Gorham is an approximately four-hour drive from Montreal.
The Glen House: 603-466-3420, theglenhouse.com( http://theglenhouse.com ); 979 Route 16, Gorham, N.H.; approximately $99-$400 U.S. per night, depending on day/season, for two, including indoor swimming pool, local/long-distance calls, coffee and cookie corner, Wi-Fi, gym, Great Glen Trail access. Pet-friendly.
The Notch Grille: Breakfast, all-day dining, vegetarian options, kid's menu.
Great Glen Trails Outdoor Center/Mt. Washington Auto Road: 603-466-3988, greatglentrails.com( http://greatglentrails.com ), mtwashingtonautoroad.com( http://mtwashingtonautoroad.com ); summer includes hiking, trail biking, fly fishing, and flat-water and white-water kayaking.
Wildcat Mountain: 888-SKI-WILD (888-754-9453), skiwildcat.com( http://skiwildcat.com ).
Mt. Washington Valley Chamber of Commerce: 800-367-3364 (800-DO-SEE-NH), mtwashingtonvalley.org( http://mtwashingtonvalley.org ).



