For those who are courageous - and hydrated - enough to brave the heat on Sunday, July 1( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-is-headed-for-a-heat-wave-environment-canada-says ), here is a list of some of the activities taking place on and off the island of Montreal in celebration of Canada Day.
Be warned: Environment Canada has issued a heat wave for the Montreal region for Canada Day weekend, with daytime highs of 30 to 35 degrees Celsius feeling more like 40 because of the humidity. The agency advises only taking part in outdoor activities during the cooler hours of the day.
Daylong parties in Old Montreal, Laval and Longueuil, topped off with fireworks
From 11:30 a.m. to just after 10 p.m., Montrealers can enjoy a full day of family-friendly activities such as street hockey, inflatable games, airbrush tattoos and photo booths in the Old Port at 333 de la Commune St. W.
For those who'd like to learn more about the nation, they can partake in virtual reality workshops about Canada's Armed Forces and watch a swearing-in ceremony of new Canadians.
As the sun begins to set, attendees will be treated to an evening of music before capping off the night with a firework display from the Jacques-Cartier pier at 10 p.m.
More information can be found on the event's website( http://www.canadadaymontreal.org/activities.html ).
For those on the North Shore, a similar event is taking place at Centre de la nature( https://www.laval.ca/Pages/Fr/Calendrier/fete-canada.aspx ) at 901 du Parc Ave. in Laval, starting up at noon with music beginning at 8 p.m. and fireworks at 10 p.m.
In Longueuil( https://www.longueuil.quebec/en/canada-day ), a parade will travel about four kilometres from René-Veillet Park (1050 de Parklane St.) to Empire Park (195 Empire St.), leading residents to a party full of games, street performers and workshops.
A concert beginning at 5:30 p.m. will lead up to fireworks, starting at 9:30 p.m.
Canada Day parade through downtown Montreal
The annual Canada Day parade will travel through downtown Montreal on Sunday, beginning at the corner of Fort and Ste-Catherine Sts. at 11 a.m.
The 1.4-kilometre parade will travel east along Ste-Catherine St. and end at Place du Canada, near René-Lévesque Blvd. and Peel St. There, attendees will be treated to free slices of a four-foot by eight-foot cake between 1:30 and 2 p.m.
Organizers say free water will be available.
More parade details, including the full route, are available on their website( http://montrealcanadadayparade.com/information ).
Music and a barbecue in Montreal West
Montreal West will be hosting a barbecue complete with music and games beginning at 4 p.m. on Sunday at Strathearn Park, on the corner of Strathearn Ave. N. and Parkside St.
For those who don't feel like venturing to Old Montreal, the town will have its own fireworks display at 10 p.m., just down the street from the earlier festivities at Hodgson Field on Bedbrook Ave.
Art in the Centre-Sud
For a change of pace, Montrealers can walk throughMtl en Arts( http://www.mtlenarts.com/en/about/ ), an open-air art exhibit featuring 90 artists, along Ste-Catherine St. between St-Hubert St. and Papineau Ave. between noon and 6 p.m. on Sunday.
Related
How to celebrate Canada Day in the West Island( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/canada-day-celebrations-in-the-west-island )
CREDIT: Kelsey Litwin, Montreal Gazette

