A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Concordia to investigate allegations of sexual misconduct in creative writing program: president( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/concordia-to-investigate-allegations-of-sexual-misconduct-in-creative-writing-program-president )
Concordia University president Alan Shepard says he was alerted Monday to what some on social media are calling an "open secret" that spanned decades: allegations of sexual misconduct and a toxic environment created by certain professors in the university's Creative Writing program.
Shepard called a news conference Wednesday afternoon to respond to allegations published Monday in an online essay by Mike Spry, a former Concordia creative writing student. Spry wrote that in his 14-year association with Concordia, he had "been witness to and made aware of innumerable instances of unwanted affection, groping, inappropriate remarks and propositions."
Spry, who admitted certain improprieties on his own part in the essay, claimed power abuses and sexual misconduct are rampant in the CanLit community in general, and at Concordia in particular. In response, several students and alumni have posted on social media their contention that sexual misconduct has been a problem in the creative writing program for many years, some naming specific professors.
Several former students of the program told the Montreal Gazette that certain professors are known for having sexual relationships with their students. Some referred to these professors as "skirt chasers" and "vipers," whom women in the program warned each other to avoid. One former student referred to these professors as the "Concordia Penis Cabal."
Man who shot unwelcome party guest in the back has parole eligibility set at 12 years( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/man-who-shot-unwelcome-party-guest-in-the-back-has-parole-eligibility-set-at-12-years )
Montreal resident Oswald Wyke will have to serve at least 12 years behind bars before he is eligible for parole in a case where he murdered a stranger who crashed his backyard party in Côte-des-Neiges three years ago.
"Wyke committed the most serious offence under the Criminal Code, which is murder," Superior Court Justice Claude Champagne wrote in his decision delivered at the Montreal courthouse on Wednesday. "He acted in a cowardly manner, shooting his victim twice in the back."
Champagne listed the fact that Wyke, 29, shot Olvin Alfredo Paz, 29, in his lower back and in the back of his skull among the aggravating factors that persuaded him to set Wyke's parole eligibility at 12 years instead of the minimum of 10 years. On Oct. 19, a jury found Wyke guilty of second-degree murder, a Criminal Code offence that comes with an automatic life sentence upon conviction. Parole eligibility can be set at anywhere between 10 and 25 years. Prosecutor Louis Bouthillier asked that Wyke's eligibility be set at 13 years, while defence lawyer Sharon Sandiford asked for the minimum.
City asks for patience as we brace for more cold, freezing rain( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-rain-deep-freeze-montreal-is-caught-in-a-weather-yo-yo )
If the persistent snow banks didn't make getting around hard enough, freezing rain is expected to be added to the mix on Wednesday and Thursday.
We've gone from deep freeze, to seasonal norms, to unseasonably warm weather and are now bracing for freezing rain, rain, a snowstorm, and then back to the deep freeze. The coming weather even led to Air Canada issuing a travel warning and to waive the usual fees for anyone wishing to change their travel plans from Jan. 11 to Jan. 14.
If the winter were a children's toy, it would be a yo-yo, as Montrealers have dealt with extremes during the first three weeks of winter.
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante saluted the work of snow removal crews who are carrying away the roughly 30 centimetres of snow that fell since the beginning of the year, but progress has been slower than most residents care for, as snowbanks are wreaking havoc on narrow streets, making it nearly impossible to park without having to shovel out mounds of snow.
"We're improving our services and it shows," Plante said at the webcast of the executive committee meeting Monday morning, after saying that the city received 1,600 fewer complaints than it did at this point of the season last year.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

