GAME UPDATE
GAME UPDATE
Boston 5 Montreal 4 (in third period)
By ERIC DUHATSCHEK Boston Globe and Mail Update Montreal is fighting back after falling into a huge playoff hole Sunday at the Fleet Center.
It was one of the wildest first periods in memory, with the Bruins racing off to a four-goal lead less than 12 minutes in play, only to see the Canadiens come back with two goals of their own to make it interesting.
Things began well for Boston when Brian Rolston scored his first of the night only 2:12 into play. Rolston hit a seam between the Canadiens' defence, right at the Canadiens blueline and, after accepting a pass from Rob Zamuner, raced to the middle of the faceoff circle and beat Theodore with a shot between the pads.
Glen Murray followed at the 9:34 mark with something of a lucky goal. On the play, the Bruins' Sergei Samsonov carried the puck into the Canadiens' zone and, spotting Nick Boynton following the play up, gave him the puck. Boynton's shot hit Craig Rivet's skate, then bounced off Murray's leg and crazily ricocheted behind Canadiens goaltender José Théodore.
That goal appeared to temporarily deflate Montreal because the Bruins scored twice more in the next 135 seconds to open up what appeared to be an insurmountable lead. With the teams playing four-on-four, Richard Zednik turned the puck over in the Bruins' zone on a rush, leaving the Canadiens' defence trapped.
The Bruins' Sean O'Donnell moved it ahead quickly to Bill Guerin, who had a breakaway from centre. Coming in hard off the right wing a stride in front of the pursuing defencemen, Guerin deked Theodore and slipped the puck along the ice into the net.
Seconds later, Joe Juneau was whistled down for goaltender interference and, with the Bruins on a four-on-three advantage, Rolston scored his second goal of the night, a slapshot from 20 feet inside the Canadiens' blueline that overpowered Théodore.
The Bruins scored four goals on 12 shots and there was some question as to whether coach Michel Therrien might pull Théodore at that juncture. He didn't - and the Canadiens managed to get two goals back before the period ended. The first came at 14:22 on a Zednik shot that rifled off the inside crossbar, jostled Dafoe's water bottle loose and then ricochted out again.
For the second time in two games, the goal light didn't go on at that end of the ice, forcing referees Mick McGeough and Brad Watson to wait for the next stoppage in play to ask for a review. The video evidence was clear - Zednik's shot was in, making it 4-1 Boston.
The rest of the period belonged to Zednik, who was stopped on a partial breakaway at the 17:10 mark after receiving a long headmanning pass from behind the Canadiens' goal line.
No matter. Zednik scored his second of the night 29 seconds later, after centre Doug Gilmour won a faceoff from Thornton back to Rivet. Rivet came down the left boards and banked a pass off O'Donnell's skate that went right to Zednik, who swept the puck past Dafoe.
Just before the buzzer sounded, Zednik almost produced a natural hat trick after the Bruins' Axelsson was sent off for hooking. Zednik had a chance for a tip-in by the side of the net, but couldn't get his stick on the shot. As time expired, Bruins' defenceman Kyle McLaren bumped Zednik, causing Zednik to slash him back and putting the Bruins on the power play to start the second.
They didn't score on that advantage, but the Bruins held a decisive territorial edge for the first half of the second period. They held a 10-1 edge in shots after 6:59 had been played. They bumped their lead in shots to 13-2 through the first 10:36 of play. Theodore made a series of good saves in that span, none better than one on Axelsson from the top of the crease just after the midpoint of the period. Boston had upped its edge on the shot clock to 14-3 when Zednik scored his third of the night at the 14:01 mark, deflecting Patrice Brisebois's shot from the right point, after Oleg Petrov had chipped it back to him.
Martin Lapointe had a chance to restore the Bruins' two-goal margin a few minutes later, but he shot the puck miles high on a breakaway.
Just when it looked as if the Canadiens would go into the third down by just a goal though, Axelsson finally connected for Boston again, beating Theodore over the shoulder with a hard slapper after a drop pass from Guerin. Theodore, who had stopped 19 shots in a row to that point, appeared to be screened by Stephane Quintal on the play.
PREVIEW
By ERIC DUHATSCHEK Boston Globe and Mail Update
The Montreal Canadiens needed to deviate from the norm in preparing for Sunday's second game of their Stanley Cup playoff game against the Boston Bruins, thanks to the crowded event schedule at the Fleet Center.
Because the Boston Celtics opened their National Basketball Association playoffs against the Philadelphia 76ers this afternoon, the Canadiens had a choice: Either bring their team, en masse, out to suburban Merrimack College and endure a 45-minute bus ride. Or cancel the morning skate altogether.
Coach Michel Therrien opted for the latter. Accordingly, only the players not scheduled to play tonight - primarily Sergei Berezin, Jan Bulis, Arron Asham, Stephane Robidas and a handful of others - accompanied assistant coach Rick Green to Merrimack. The others stayed in the hotel for a meeting and then dispersed until late afternoon.
The Canadiens and Bruins will be the last teams to play Game 2 of their series and it was largely because of scheduling conflicts at the Fleet Center. The series couldn't begin on a Wednesday because the Celtics played their regular-season finale that night. On Friday night, the Paul McCartney tour passed through town, followed by a skating show that filled the building twice Saturday, once in the afternoon, once in the evening.
Provided the basketball game doesn't go in overtime, the event staff will have roughly three hours to turn the building over from hoops to hockey, usually time enough in this day and age. The problem often is that the ice underneath the basketball floor gets soft and thus chips far too readily.
The only good news is that the heat wave that rolled through New England towards the end of last week is over. Cooler temperatures will make it easier for the air conditioning system to keep the temperature of the building down.
With two days between games, the Canadiens practised just the once - on Saturday morning, out at Merrimack. There were no line-up - or for that matter, strategy - changes expected, after the Canadiens won the series opener 5-2 over the favored Bruins, the top-seeded team in the Eastern Conference.
The Bruins, by contrast, vowed to produce a more disciplined overall effort. The two primary adjustments they'll try to make: To be better in the faceoff circle; and to spend less time chasing around the Canadiens' crafty forwards around the zone.
The Canadiens boast the league's top faceoff man in Yanic Perreault and had a good night, winning 10 of 15. Doug Gilmour, centre of the second line, was even better, winning nine of 11 draws. By contrast, Brian Rolston, centre of Boston's checking line, managed just six wins of 17 and Jozef Stumpel, who was out against Gilmour most of the night, won just four of 15.
"It always helps when you start with the puck," said the Canadiens' Donald Audette.
Faceoffs were a Bruins' shortcoming all season, coach Robbie Ftorek conceded, but just how quickly can they turn that around in 48 hours?
As for their defensive zone coverage, left winger Sergei Samsonov suggested the Bruins' players were often guilty of trying to do much and thus sometimes missed their own assignments. The Canadiens were especially effective in hitting the trailer coming late on the play. It was how Oleg Petrov managed to score his goal, which was eventually disallowed.
"In the defensive zone, we were just trying to chase guys and not playing up to our positions," said Samsonov. "That allowed them to get their momentum and to get things rolling."
Like a lot of the Bruins' players, Samsonov wasn't thrilled by having so much time between games. It helped, among others, Canadiens' captain Saku Koivu, who is recovering from cancer, but it just forced the Bruins to endlessly answer questions about what went wrong in the opener.
"It's a little too much time to think about it," said Samsonov, "but we'll get over it."

