As Montreal hunkers down for what's predicted to be the worst snowstorm of the year( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/evolution-of-the-storm-delay-travel-montrealers-told-ahead-of-mega-blizzard ), it may be heartening to discover there's a Winter Laboratory in the works to help Quebecers better appreciate what many look upon as their long season of discontent.
While Montreal does well at large winter events like Igloofest( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/igloofest-old-port-music-event-puts-the-party-on-ice ), planners note it is lacking in widespread urban offerings that can help alleviate the winter blahs.
Included among the key mood-lifting strategies are more small-scale public spaces for winter activities, adding refrigerated rinks, allowing outdoor or enclosed terrasses, and doing whatever it takes to combat slush.
The Winter Laboratory was launched in late January by three urban planning organizations - Vivre en Ville, Rues Principales and La Pépinière/Espaces Collectifs - to bring together local government, community organizations and the private sector to develop pilot projects and share ideas that can be used throughout Quebec.
"It's during this long season that social isolation is at its most pronounced, and inactivity, particularly among children, becomes a major public health challenge," Jérôme Glad, co-director of La Pépinière/Espaces Collectifs, said in a statement. "We need to create more spontaneous occasions in which to get out and move, in the heart of our neighbourhoods, so we don't lose the community spirit that elevates the quality of life of our cities."
With 148 days below freezing and 210 centimetres (seven feet) of snow each year on average, Montreal's winters are some of the harshest among international urban centres. Yet we lack urban spaces or designs featured in other northern cities that encourage people to go outside and embrace winter, seen as a chief element in alleviating the depression and isolation that often accompany the season.
Research conducted by PhD student Kari Leibowitz in the northern Norwegian city of Tromso concluded that one of the key means of combating winter gloom is changing one's mindset.( https://www.fastcompany.com/3052970/the-norwegian-secret-to-enjoying-a-long-winter ) Residents there take part in outdoor activities (particularly cross-country skiing), enjoy the coziness of a candlelit room, and attend numerous community events and festivals. Residents here can alleviate seasonal depression by getting out for a brisk walk (while avoiding icy sidewalks), resisting the North American temptation to gripe about the weather, and meeting with friends.
To encourage those types of activities and interactions, organizers of the Winter Laboratory published a guide, titled Winter City, with suggestions on how to make a city more winter-friendly.( https://vivreenville.org/notre-travail/publications/collection-vers-des-collectivites-viables/2019/ville-d-hiver.aspx ) Among the main suggestions:
Design park installations and outdoor seating areas to be used year-round, as opposed to just in the summer, adding elements like refrigerated rinks, lighting, and mini-terrasses where people can chat.
With more frequent freeze/thaw cycles, Montreal winters are characterized by street corner slush ponds that bring a negative view of public spaces. Minimize slush, particularly in popular pedestrian zones like Ste-Catherine St., by constructing sidewalk enlargements and raised pedestrian walkways, and putting more resources into clearing sewage drains.
Add benches or public terrasses in places that get the most sun, areas that have their own microclimates and generate warmer weather.
Increase the number of pedestrian-only streets to encourage walking areas and commerce, and reduce the number of streets that have to be cleared of snow.
Montreal has hundreds of "green alleyways" where spaces once reserved for vehicle traffic have become children's play areas and attractive walking zones. Focus on creating similar "white alleyways" to encourage play, and skating and sliding by building mini-rinks.
Make nature accessible. For example: the Norwegian forest area known as Nordmarka is easily accessible by Oslo's metro, and has cafés with viewing areas over fjords and countryside, and numerous winter sporting activities to take part in or watch, including cross-country skiing, luge and ski jumping and tobogganing.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
Related
Bill Brownstein: Got the SAD blues? Blame February( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/bill-brownstein-got-the-sad-blues-blame-february )

