Southern Ontario was hit with a winter storm Thursday, making a white Christmas and travel headaches both a reality.
Environment Canada says there could be as much as 30 centimetres of snow before the storm blows through.
Other parts of the country are getting a variety of weather types as well Thursday.
"It's balmy in Calgary while it's frigid in Saskatchewan and Winnipeg," David Phillips, senior climatologist for Environment Canada, told globeandmail.com. The wind chill is -48 degrees Celsius in Winnipeg.
The weather is affecting operations at Pearson Airport in Toronto, where several flights have been cancelled or delayed.
"Between 120 and 130 flights have been either cancelled or consolidated," Connie Turner, the general manager for the Greater Toronto Airports Authority, said.
The airport was expecting 80,000 people to go through its terminals Thursday, one day before Christmas Eve. What was normally expected to be a busy day at the airport is turning out to be an even busier one, with backups occurring because of the volume.
"It's going to better than anticipated -- the runways are clean and the [cleaning]crew was out there all night," Ms. Turner said.
Thursday shouldn't be the busiest day at Pearson, she points out. Instead, the GTAA is expecting 102,000 people going through the airport on Jan. 2.
Air Canada says early flights to Ottawa, Calgary and Montreal are affected, along with some flights to U.S. destinations. Some United Airlines flights are also cancelled.
Jacqueline Richard, a spokeswoman for Aéroports de Montreal, said most flight cancellations at the Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport were not as a result of conditions in Montreal.
"Flights are being cancelled because of conditions elsewhere, [not only in Ontario]but Cincinnati and Detroit," she said.
Despite the cancellations, Ms. Richard said it was a quiet morning at Trudeau.
"Things have been going rather smoothly," she said. "It'll be a lot busier this afternoon...we're expecting this to be the busiest day of the year."
VIA Rail Canada released a statement Thursday morning, providing other transportation options for travellers whose holiday plans changed due to flight cancellations.
"Space is still available on many of the departures throughout the Windsor to Québec City Corridor. While many trains will be busy, seats still remain on most departures between Montréal-Québec City, Montréal-Ottawa, Montréal-Toronto and Windsor-Toronto," the statement says.
The snowstorm warning remains in place for communities west of Toronto and through the Niagara region. There is also a heavy snowfall warning covering most of southwestern Ontario, including Windsor and Sarnia.
"Let's look at the positive," Mr. Phillips said. "This is going to ensure that the province is going to have a white Christmas."
"We didn't have a white Christmas last year," Mr. Phillips said. "For the most part, they have been brown in the past 10 years."
"The storm's timing is what makes it a buzz out there. Its timing makes it more significant than the type of precipitation."
Mr. Phillips says the storm is not out of season.
"The storm is behaving, it's not record-breaking. It doesn't indicate that we're going to be getting a bunch of these," he commented.
Mr. Phillips noted that the greatest impact for most areas is over and cleanup has already begun. However, the storm has been a mixed bag of precipitation.
"This storm is almost like a winter factory," Mr. Phillips said.
In the Toronto area the snowfall has ended, giving way to freezing rain. As a result, Environment Canada has issued a freezing rain warning for Toronto and areas to the north of the city. The warning also extends through Oshawa, Pickering, Belleville, Kingston, Ottawa and Cornwall.
Other regions of the province had a variety of conditions. Aurora received 17 centimetres of snow, followed by freezing rain. It was raining in the Niagara Peninsula while Windsor and Pearson airports received light snow. Toronto island received light rain and Ottawa got ice pellets.
Some areas experienced all types of precipitation, like in London, where the north part of the city received snow while the south part received freezing rain. Mr. Phillips pointed out that some areas could simply receive thunderstorms.
Environment Canada has also posted various weather warnings for snow or freezing rain from Windsor to the Quebec border.
"The day will end with snow," Mr. Phillips said. Rain will turn into snow tonight in most areas, including Toronto.

