The bottom line: Brendan Gallagher's 16th goal of the season snapped a 2-2 tie and propelled the Canadiens to a 5-2 win over the Vancouver Canucks on Sunday night at the Bell Centre. Gallagher cashed in on the rebound of Karl Alzner's shot from the point at 8:44 of the third period. It was the second point of the night for Alzner, who opened the scoring with his first goal as a Canadien. Gallagher also assisted as Paul Byron added an insurance goal with 1:15 to play and Max Pacioretty added an empty-netter with 58.1 seconds remaining. The win left the Canadiens six points out of the final wild-card spot, but there are five teams ahead of them in the battle for that berth.
Canadiens' Karl Alzner, right, celebrates with teammate Brendan Gallagher after scoring against the Canucks in Montreal on Sunday, Jan. 7, 2018.
Alzner breaks the ice: Alzner scored an unassisted goal to give the Canadiens a 1-0 lead at 9:38 of the second period. Alzner picked up a loose puck in the Montreal zone and unloaded with a shot from the point. Canucks goaltender Anders Nilsson may have been distracted by Gallagher, who was crashing the net looking for a rebound that never materialized. The Canadiens failed to capitalize on two breakaways in the first period. On the first, Pacioretty was unable to control a rolling puck and had to settle for a weak shot. Byron had a shorthanded breakaway later in the period, but his shot was high and wide.
Canadiens' Alex Galchenyuk battles for position against Canucks' Erik Gudbranson near goaltender Anders Nilsson at the Bell Centre on Sunday, Jan. 7, 2018.
Galchenyuk supplies power: Alex Galchenyuk gave Montreal a 2-0 lead when he scored a power-play goal at 2:12 of the second period. Jeff Petry set up Galchenyuk for a one-timer from the right wall. It was Galchenyuk's 10th goal of the season and his fifth on the power play. Jonathan Drouin was awarded the second assist on the goal and has two assists in his last 12 games. The Canucks cut the Montreal lead to 2-1 when Daniel Sedin deflected Alexander Edler's shot from the point at 13:04 of the second period. It was Sedin's ninth goal of the season and his twin brother, Henrik, had the other assist on the goal.
Michael Del Zotto #4 of the Vancouver Canucks scores a third period goal on goaltender Carey Price #31 of the Montreal Canadiens during the NHL game at the Bell Centre on January 7, 2018 in Montreal.
Canucks come back: Vancouver completed the comeback to tie the score at 2-2 when Michael Del Zotto took a pass from rookie scoring leader Brock Boeser and beat Carey Price at 2:43 of the third period. The Canucks were presented with an odd-man rush when Drouin lost the puck deep in the Vancouver zone.
Carr scratched again: On a points-per-game basis, Daniel Carr is the Canadiens' leading scorer with 10 points in 14 games, but he was a healthy scratch for the second consecutive game. Byron Froese and Victor Mete were also scratched. Mete is home in Ontario after helping Canada win the gold medal at the world junior championship. General manager Marc Bergevin said Sunday that Mete would probably finish the season with the Canadiens. Defenceman Alex Biega, a Harvard grad from the West Island, was among the Vancouver scratches.
Canucks goaltender Anders Nilsson holds off Canadiens' Andrew Shaw in Montrea on Sunday, Jan. 7, 2018.
Calm before the storm: The Canadiens are heading into their so-called bye week, which means they'll be off the ice until 4 p.m. Friday when they will gather for a practice in Brossard. The rest will be welcome because the Canadiens will play the Boston Bruins on Saturday in the first of five games over eight nights. Montreal will be at home to the Islanders, hit the road for games in Boson and Washington and return to the Bell Centre for another game against the Bruins on Jan. 20.
phickey@postmedia.com( mailto:phickey@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/zababes1( http://twitter.com/zababes1 )
CREDIT: Pat Hickey, Montreal Gazette

