Six Montrealers have died of causes related to this week's heat wave, public health authorities said Tuesday as Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante announced stepped-up measures to help vulnerable residents like seniors and people with chronic diseases.
Plante said firefighters and police have started going door to door to visit at-risk Montrealers to ensure they are taking such precautions as drinking plenty of water and accessing the services they need during the extreme weather.
Dr. Mylène Drouin, Montreal's regional director of public health, said there were six deaths related to the heat wave, although the total number of deaths in the city for all causes has not risen beyond the normal level of 10 per day.
Authorities are targeting areas of the city with high populations of seniors and low-income residents and a high proportion of heat islands, caused by expanses of concrete and asphalt as well as tall buildings, she said. On Monday, emergency teams visited 1,300 addresses in the downtown, Villeray and Hochelaga-Maisonneuve districts and they were to visit another 5,000 on Tuesday.
"Our teams are on the ground and are following the situation closely to adapt their actions according to the needs of the public," said Montreal fire chief Bruno Lachance, who is the co-ordinator of public safety for the Montreal agglomeration.
Of the 1,300 people visited Monday, only one had to be taken to a hospital, he said.
Plante urged Montrealers to keep an eye on neighbours who are elderly, isolated or sick and to make sure they have access to a place to cool off.
"There's nothing like being a good neighbour," she said.
"If you have an older neighbour and you wonder if she's safe, please go and knock on the door, and just find out if the person is OK," she said.
Drouin said public health authorities established Montreal's strategy for extreme heat episodes after the heat wave of early July 2010, when 106 people died of weather-related causes.
"We learned our lesson from 2010," she said.
The very young and very old, and people suffering from mental illness or drug dependencies, are particularly vulnerable to the effects of extreme heat, as are those with chronic illnesses like diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease and respiratory illnesses, Drouin said.
And she reminded the public never to leave a child or pet in a car, even for a minute.
The CAA warned Tuesday that a vehicle's cabin turns into an oven in the hot sun. At 22 degrees Celsius, the inside temperature of the vehicle reaches 50 C; at 35 C, it reaches 66; and at 41 C, it reaches 100, the boiling point for water.
Commuter trains delayed
The heat has also resulted in delays on the Exo (formerly Réseau de transport métropolitan) Deux-Montagnes commuter train line Tuesday afternoon. A spokesperson for the agency said the high temperature and humidity affected the wires in the signals at the Mont-Royal tunnel and that CN employees fixed the problem around 5:15 p.m, during rush hour.
She continued that because of the extreme weather and the tunnel's old age, they cannot control how humidity affects the equipment.
Stay hydrated and cool
On Friday, the city implemented the first stage of its intervention strategy for extremely hot weather by extending hours for municipal swimming pools and urging residents to:
Drink plenty of water, without waiting until you feel thirsty.
Take cool baths or showers to cool off.
Spend a few hours in air-conditioned environments like shopping centres, libraries, movie theatres, etc.
Limit physical activity.
Wear light clothing.
Drouin said authorities are deploying the additional measures because the hot, humid weather that began on the weekend is expected to last until at least Thursday. Environment Canada has maintained a heat warning for most of southern Quebec, Ontario and parts of the Maritimes.
More heat to come
Despite the record-breaking weekend, meteorologist with Environment Canada Antoine Petit said the worst is not over yet. With more southerly winds expected for Thursday, Montrealers will feel a substantial increase in humidity. He said that will make the forecast of 34 C feel closer to 45.
The good news: thunderstorms overnight Thursday to Friday will lead to a cold break, bringing the city back down to its normal seasonal temperatures of around 25 C just before the weekend, Petit continued.
Petit said the last time Montreal saw a prolonged heat wave like this was in the 1970s.
With climate change, these episodes are becoming increasingly common, Drouin noted.
CLSCs open
Air-conditioned rooms in 19 CLSCs across the city are being opened to vulnerable members of the public. If you need a place to cool off or know an elderly or vulnerable person who does, call 811 and you will be directed to the appropriate resources.
Drouin said Urgences-santé received 1,200 calls for ambulances Monday - up from the normal 950. Ambulances transported 631 people to hospitals, compared with the normal average of 536.
She acknowledged that some patients in local hospitals and chronic-care institutions are in rooms without air conditioning. Patients in those settings should be taken out of their rooms twice a day, for two hours at a time, to an air-conditioned part of the building. They should also be provided with other measures to keep cool, like towels moistened with cold water, she said.
Plante said the city has distributed 17,000 litres of bottled water to organizations working with the homeless and another 25,000 litres to boroughs, other island communities and emergency services.
To find out hours for local pools( http://www1.ville.montreal.qc.ca/banque311/content/%E2%96%BA-arrondissements-%E2%80%93-plages-piscines-ext%C3%A9rieures-pataugeoires-jeux-deau-et-haltes-climatis%C3%A9es ), visit the city's website or call 311.
If you need information about health symptoms caused by the heat( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=9657,125797604&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL ), call 811 or, for an emergency, call 911.
On Monday, the temperature reached 35.2 C in Montreal, with a humidex of 45. By noon Tuesday, it was 30 C with a humidex of 38, according to the weather office.
Humidex values in the Montreal area could reach 40 on Wednesday and could go over 40 on Thursday, Environment Canada said.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
Related
Watch: Montreal comes out to celebrate Canada Day 151 despite the heat( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-montreal-comes-out-to-celebrate-canada-day-151-despite-the-heat?video_autoplay=true )
We ran out of ways to tell you it's going to be really hot( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-we-ran-out-of-ways-to-tell-you-its-going-to-be-really-hot )
Kelsey Litwin of The Montreal Gazette contributed to this report.
CREDIT: Marian Scott, Montreal Gazette

