In the midst of the COVID-19 crisis, I am filled with hope. Because now, more than ever, it's crystal clear: people can change their behaviour, and people want to do the right thing. From the huge sacrifice of self-quarantining, to the front-line workers' dedication, to the global co-operation of governments, the world has truly come together as one, like never before.
If we can do this, we can solve the climate crisis.
COVID-19 proves that we can choose to listen when scientists sound the alarm. We can see a crisis coming and choose to act immediately, introducing sweeping measures, even if they mean that society and the economy will have to adapt.
We can have a global, coordinated response and co-operation from every segment of society.
Currently, climate change is the last thing on most people's minds, but once COVID-19 is over, we will be heading straight into another crisis, and there is a lot we can learn by comparing the two.
If we thought that our societies don't have the money to pay for strong climate policies, or that they are simply not "economically feasible," we now realize this is not the case. With COVID-19, governments everywhere are pouring trillions of dollars into testing, health care, research and aid packages, not to mention that we have accepted a major economic crisis in order to save lives.
Climate action has been delayed for decades to avoid have an impact on the economy, but what has become clear with COVID-19 is that the economy is completely dependent on society and the environment; ignoring a crisis for the sake of the economy is not only immoral, it is also pointless. Just imagine the disaster that dropping COVID-19 safety measures in the midst of this global pandemic would bring. Not only would the death toll be absolutely horrendous, the cost for the economy would also be huge.
And when the climate crisis brings unbearable temperatures, ceaseless forest fires and constant floods, the economy will be as unstable as everything else.
We activists are told over and over that the massive changes we call for are impossible; that people won't be willing to change their lifestyles so drastically. And yet, here we are. The sacrifices made by nearly everyone would have seemed impossible a few months ago.
COVID-19 shows us that we are capable of profound change, but now, unfortunately, it comes with huge costs, both for our personal wellbeing and for the economy.
We need to come together to solve the climate crisis with the same intensity and commitment.
If we do it right, the cost will be far smaller. The difference is that with climate change, instead of a chaotic shutdown, we can have a deliberate movement toward a greener and better society. With plans like the GreenNew Deal, we can transition to a zero-carbon economy quickly while still maintaining, and even improving, everyone's wellbeing.
A time of crisis is also an opportunity for a new beginning, and that is exactly what we need right now. So before we rush to bail out polluting corporations and go back to the way things were, let's think of what we want for the future and take this as an opportunity to start heading in that direction. Finance Minister Bill Morneau's recent announcement that he will be asking for companies' environmental scorecard before offering loans, as well as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's announcement of $1.7 billion to clean up orphaned oil wells, are steps in the right direction. We need more creative solutions to get laid off workers back on the job without trying to revive dying industries like oil and gas again and again.
COVID-19 proves that we are capable of overcoming a crisis; there are no excuses left to keep pushing climate change aside.
Shirley Barnea is a climate activist and Grade 10 student at St. George's High School in Montreal.
Related
More coverage of coronavirus
Opinion: Preparing our students for the climate future
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 21 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

