DALLAS - The Canadiens went all-in at centre at the 2018 NHL entry draft, but it will be at least a year before the picks pay a dividend at the NHL level.
The prize is Jesperi Kotkaniemi and the Habs went out on the limb to pick him with the third overall pick Friday.
"We hope Kotkaniemi plays in the NHL soon, but that's something that will sort itself out at training camp," said assistant general manager Trevor Timmins. "We're in this for the long haul and the goal is to develop players who are going to get better and help us make the playoffs consistently
The Canadiens continued to look at the middle as the draft concluded Saturday with Rounds 2 to 7. Montreal had 10 picks on the second day and six of them were centres. The one thing the picks had in common Saturday was that most of them are on the small side. Swede Jacob Olofsson, who was selected in the second round at No. 51, was the only centre on Day 2 who tops 6 feet.
Surprisingly, for a team that values defencemen, the Canadiens selected only two blueliners. They started the second round by picking Alexander Romanov, who is the definition of flying under the radar. There wasn't a single scouting analyst who had him higher than the fourth round, but the Canadiens picked him at No. 35.
Here's a look at players selected Saturday:
Jesse Ylonen (35th overall), 6-foot-1, 168 pounds, right wing. The son of former NHLer Juha Ylonen had 14 goals and 13 assists in 48 games with Espoo in the Mestis, the Finnish Second Division. One of the older players in the draft - he'll be 19 in October, he played against men and will move up to Lahti Pelicans jn the top-level Liiga next season. He's a good skater and has a good shot, but he needs to fill out his frame.
"He has the bloodlines and he has phenomenal quickness," Timmins said. "He makes plays at high speed. He has a lot of potential and room for growth both physically and as a hockey player.
Alexander Romanov (38th overall) 5-foot-11, 185 pounds, defenceman. This pick came out of left field. Romanov, who plays for the CKSA junior team, was ranked No. 115 among European skaters by the Central Scouting Bureau. A two-way defenceman, he said he expected to go late in the second round or early in the third. The Canadiens interviewed him in Stockholm. He has two years remaining on his contract in Russia and expects to move up to the KHL next season. He plans to come to North America when his contract expires.
"He's going to remind you a little of (Alexei) Emelin, but with a ton of energy," Timmins said. "He already plays like a pro. He plays the game fast. He moves puck quickly. We wanted a left-shot defenceman and we stepped up to take him."
Jacob Olofsson (51st overall) 6-foot-2, 190 pounds, centre. Olofsson is a responsible two-way centre and represents a safe choice. There are few weaknesses in his game, but there are also no aspects of his game that stand out. He has good size and scored 10 goals and 21 points to help Timra earn promotion to the Swedish Elite League last season.
Cam Hillis (67th overall) 5-foot-11, 168 pounds, centre. Being drafted by the Canadiens was an early birthday present for Hillis, who turned 18 on Sunday. The undersized centre said he wasn't surprised Montreal drafted him because they had a number of interviews and they have a shared philosophy. He prides himself on his work ethic and he patterns his game on Brendan Gallagher. "I can be a real pain in the butt, a pest," Hillis said. He had 20 goals and 59 points in 60 games with the Guelph Storm in his first season of major junior.
"Hills is 5-foot-10, but he plays like he's 6-foot-4," Timmins said. "He has an engine that never stops. He was a rookie and he ended up as the first-line centre on a Guelph team which had quite a few players drafted."
Jordan Harris (71st overall) 5-foot-11, 180-pounds, defenceman. A new-wave defenceman who moves the puck well, Harris figures to be a long-term project. He's coming out of a low-profile prep school program at Kimball Union and will enrol at Boston's Northeastern University in the fall. He says earning a degree is important and he also needs time to get stronger. He said he will probably spend four years in college unless the Canadiens feel he's ready to make a jump to pro hockey. He said Chicago's Duncan Keith in his role model.
DALLAS, TX - JUNE 23: Jordan Harris reacts after being selected 71st overall by the Montreal Canadiens during the 2018 NHL Draft at American Airlines Center on June 23, 2018 in Dallas, Texas.
"We wanted an offensive defenceman, a dynamic skater and he was available," Timmins said. "We like his upside and he'll have four years to develop."
Allan McShane (97th overall) 5-foot-11, 190 pounds, centre. Another smallish centre, McShane averaged nearly point a game with the Oshawa Generals, collecting 20 goals and 65 points in 67 games. He's an excellent skater and he sees the ice well, but there are concerns he spends too much time on the perimeter.
Jack Gorniak (123rd overall) 5-foot-11, 180 pounds, left wing. Gorniak said his stock in trade in his speed and his role models are Gallagher for his tenaciousness and Brayden Point for his speed. He played high school hockey close to home in Wisconsin and has enrolled at the University of Wisconsin. He scored 28 goals and 56 points in 24 high school games. He said the Canadiens scouted him extensively in high school and his stock went up with a strong performance at the combine in Buffalo. He has an accurate shot, but he needs to work on his velocity.
"He's another guy with speed and he's going to a good program with good coaches," Timmins said.
Related
Stu Cowan: Canadiens GM looks to future by drafting Jesperi Kotkaniemi( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/stu-cowan-canadiens-gm-looks-to-future-by-drafting-jesperi-kotkaniemi )
Watch: Gazette's Pat Hickey talks about 'interesting' draft pick by Canadiens( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/montreal-canadiens/watch-gazettes-pat-hickey-talks-about-interesting-draft-pick-by-canadiens?video_autoplay=true )
Cole Fonstad (128th overall) 5-foot-10, 159 pounds, left wing/centre. A speedy, creative player, Fonstad's biggest drawback in his lack of size. He had a breakthrough this past season with 22 goals and 73 points in 72 games with the Prince Albert Raiders. The big question is how much of that offence resulted from playing with Winnipeg Jets draft choice Jordan Stallard. Fonstad was a fifth overall choice in the WHL draft as a centre and he may get another look at that position with Stallard moving into the pro ranks.
"He's been playing left wing, but he's been a centre all his life," Timmins said. "It's good to have that versatility. You can always take a centre and put him on the wing, but you can't put a winger at centre."
Samuel Houde (132nd overall) 6-foot, 161 pounds, centre. A first-round draft pick in the QMJHL, Houde is a smart player, but he needs to bulk up. He had underwhelming numbers in Chicoutimi with 16 goals and 32 points in 54 games.
Brett Stapley (190th overall) 5-foot-10, 170 pounds, centre/right wing. The Canadiens traded to get this pick from Philadelphia and the 19-year-old Stapley is another long-term project. He's been scoring at a point-a-game pace the past two seasons for the Vernon Vipers in the BCHL. He'll go to the University of Denver to add some strength.
"We've had him at two combines and we think the world of him," Timmins said. "He's a smaller player and he's been a bit under the radar."
The Canadiens made several trades where they moved down and picked up fourth- and fifth-round draft choices next year.
phickey@postmedia.com( mailto:phickey@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/zababes1( http://twitter.com/zababes1 )
CREDIT: Pat Hickey, Montreal Gazette

