Santiago Jimenez experiences anxiety every time he opens the front door to his home.
The simple action reminds the 74-year-old engineer and salesman of how a stranger stormed into his home in Vaudreuil-Dorion before noon on Nov. 27, 2015, and pummelled his face so badly he was unable to see anything as he was later rushed to a hospital.
"I was technically dead and I was lucky to be alive," Jimenez said at the Valleyfield courthouse on Thursday while he testified at a sentence hearing for Rakeim Terrence Floyd, the 27-year-old St-Lazare resident who pleaded guilty, on Jan. 11, to four charges related to the home invasion.
"I don't want to hurt you," Floyd was quoted as having told Jimenez when he forced his way into the home and then, seconds later, proceeded to repeatedly punch the victim in the face. The victim suffered several skull fractures and his eyes were so badly damaged he had to undergo two different types of surgery to correct his vision.
Jimenez was alone at the time and still can't recall how he managed to call 911 and his wife after Floyd left his home.
"I have lived and I continue to live terrible moments," Jimenez said while explaining to Quebec Court Judge Bertrand St-Arnaud how, three years later, emotions like anger, anxiety and panic continue to suddenly surface.
"Every time I wake up I feel different emotions. I experience panic attacks," he said. "Every time I open the front door I see (Floyd) standing there. No matter what I do I cannot put away my memories of this person."
Prosecutor Pierre-Olivier Gagnon asked that Floyd be sentenced to a 14-year prison term, the maximum sentence for the aggravated assault charge to which he pleaded guilty. Gagnon noted that Floyd has already been convicted in another home invasion, carried out with an accomplice on Dec. 15, 2011. In that case, Floyd received an overall sentence of 30 months. Back then, his youth and lack of a significant criminal record were considered mitigating factors that contributed to the sentence. Floyd cannot expect the same leniency this time around. His lawyer, Guy Lalonde, concedes his client merits a sentence somewhere between six and eight years.
To support his argument for the maximum sentence, Gagnon submitted a pre-sentencing report in which Floyd, who listened to Jimenez's testimony without registering any reaction, was assessed as being at high risk of reoffending. St-Arnaud was also shown images, recorded by surveillance cameras inside stores, that proved Floyd gassed up his car and purchased a pair of gloves just minutes before he assaulted Jimenez.
Jimenez and his wife were unable to return to their home for more than a month while police continued to search for the person responsible. He and his wife had security cameras installed in their home and a gate in an entranceway in the weeks that followed the attack. They also hired security guards to protect them for weeks while they continued to wonder why someone would storm into their home and carry out a crime with such brutal force. Jimenez's wife estimated they spent more than $70,000 in an effort to feel safe again.
Floyd was ultimately linked to the home invasion through his car, a gift from his father, Tyrone Floyd, and was arrested in January 2016. By the time police got their hands on the car it had been throughly cleaned except for the seatbelt buckles, where a forensics expert found traces of Jimenez's DNA.
Tyrone Floyd, 47, testified in support of his son on Thursday and urged St-Arnaud to consider that his oldest son (out of eight children) began abusing dugs and alcohol in high school where he was mocked for being overweight and managed to keep the abuse a secret for years.
"(The prosecution) is painting a picture of someone who is horrible. That is not Rakeim," the father said while adding that his son only opened up to him about his substance abuse following his arrest for the second home invasion.
"It's very difficult time for us also. That's not how I raised him," the father said.
While being cross-examined by Gagnon later in his testimony, Tyrone Floyd conceded that another of his sons is currently out on parole as part of a four-year sentence he received for carrying out a home invasion.
St-Arnaud said he will deliberate on the arguments and testimony he heard before he delivers his decision.
pcherry@postmedia.com( mailto:pcherry@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Paul Cherry, Montreal Gazette

