It appears that cycling could grow into a four-season activity in Quebec.
Magali Bebronne of Vélo Québec says workshops on winter cycling are growing in number and there is "enormous" demand for the information they provide, including winter cycling techniques and tips on how to dress and plan your route.
Bebronne attributes that popularity to Montreal's decision to maintain most of its bicycle path network 12 months a year. The city clears about 76 per cent of the network during the winter months, she notes, adding that the year-round availability of the recently inaugurated 184-kilometre Réseau Express Vélo (REV) will also lure riders who have until now been hesitant to ride in winter.
And Bebronne defends the decision to clear bike paths in winter, noting that no one seems to complain when the city removes snow from alleyways or little travelled streets.
"Times have changed," she said. "Traffic is an issue and at a time when there's no organized sports, at least getting out (by bicycle) allows you some physical activity."
Nor is winter cycling only catching on in Montreal. Fabien Burnotte, co-founder of the Vélo Urbain Sherbrooke Facebook group, says the ranks of winter cyclers are growing in his Eastern Townships city.
Burnotte remembers when he used to be perceived as an oddity while taking his child to daycare by bicycle.
"But now it's become normal," he said.
But he adds that while things have improved when it comes to sharing the road with cars and other vehicles, the situation remains far from easy.
"Used to be a truck would barely miss me at least once a week, now I'd say it's more like once a month, which is four times less," he joked grimly, adding that it's a shame that not all local bike paths are plowed during the winter.
City authorities in Sherbrooke acknowledge "there's still work to do" but add the will to change things is there, noting the city's "active" transportation plan, which includes provisions for walking and cycling along with motorized traffic, is proof of that.
Winter cycling popularity has also been helped by the advent of the "fat bike," so named because of its oversized tires.
Bebronne says there are more than 90 "fat bike" networks in Quebec despite the fact the bicycles were little known five years ago.
Over time, techniques have been developed to maintain the trail surfaces.
"With weather conditions more difficult or unpredictable, this sport provides a good alternative when you can't go cross-country skiing because of freezing rain," she said.
This report was prepared as part of the Facebook and Canadian Press News Scholarship Program.
Related
Winter biking in Montreal? No sweat
Winter cycling in Montreal is an exercise in snowy frustration
Trails, rinks, lights: Plante urges Montrealers to 'get some air'

