If you think the world's current political climate is scary, wait till you see the latest batch of genre movies that have emerged from it.
The 23rd Fantasia International Film Festival opens Thursday and presents 130 features and over 200 shorts, through Aug. 1. As usual, it's a mad grab bag of horror, action, thrillers and offbeat comedy, combined with an in-depth survey of the year in Asian cinema.
Pondering the mayhem, Fantasia co-director and director of international programming Mitch Davis noted that this year's crop boasts a particularly twisted batch of movies, even for a festival as wild as Fantasia.
"The last time we saw genre films that were so anguished goes back to Bush-era 9/11," he said. "The world is going to more frightening places, and genre films express that worry, anger and devastation, which leads to commentary, discussion and confrontation. That's when genre is at its most interesting. It's the only silver lining in horrible times."
Davis pointed to Lorcan Finnegan's Vivarium (Friday, 9:30 p.m., Concordia's Alumni Auditorium), starring Jesse Eisenberg and Imogen Poots as a young couple trapped in a mysterious suburban development project, which screened as part of Cannes Critics' Week.
"It's a black comedy, sci-fi horror film that feels like something out of The Twilight Zone," he said. "They're trapped in a new real estate development. Then a child appears and they have to take care of it. It's an interesting allegory of what home ownership does to young parents, and of the suburbs as a place where people are isolated to be breeders and consumers."
Finnegan will be in town for the screening, as will many filmmakers at Fantasia. Eisenberg and Poots also star in Riley Stearns's opening-night offering The Art of Self-Defense (Thursday, 9:30 p.m., Alumni Auditorium), which posits the former as a mild-mannered accountant who joins a karate school.
There are other big names in Fantasia's lineup. Liam Hemsworth stars in Malik Bader's Killerman (July 20, 9:45 p.m., Alumni Auditorium), in which a guy wakes up with millions of dollars in cash and drugs, and no memory of how he acquired it.
"Danish crime-film fans, take note," Davis said. "It's in the vein of '70s Don Siegel films (Dirty Harry, Escape From Alcatraz). It's an intense, fun film, which should be wild with our audience."
Fantasia is noted for its highly informed, enthusiastic fan base, known to cheer, gasp and groan in all the right places, to the delight of visiting film teams.
Lupita Nyong'o stars in Australian actor-director Abe Forsythe's zombie comedy Little Monsters (Friday, July 12, 7 p.m., Alumni Auditorium), which was a hit at Sundance this year.
Matthew Pope's Blood on Her Name (July 17 at 9:40 p.m., July 19 at 4:15 p.m., Concordia's J.A. de Sève Cinema) stars Bethany Anne Lind (Ozark) as a woman who panics following an accidental killing.
"It's a southern gothic neo-noir," Davis said of the world première, calling it "one of the best films of the year, and one of the most powerful, sophisticated films."
Fantasia is not all blood and gore. Sometimes it's even emotionally poignant, but always with a twist.
Veteran American actor Richard Dreyfuss is back in British Columbia actress Shelagh McLeod's directorial debut, Astronaut (July 14, 7 p.m., Alumni Auditorium), about a man who always wanted to see the stars up close.
"It's a sentimental drama with elements of realist fantasy," Davis said. "It's super sweet and touching, hearkening back to Dreyfuss's character Roy Neary in Close Encounters of the Third Kind."
Onur Tukel's Black Magic for White Boys (July 19 at 6:45 p.m., July 23 at 2:40 p.m., J.A. de Sève Cinema) tells the story of an aging magician who goes to great lengths to save his New York neighbourhood.
"It's a very funny black comedy about gentrification," Davis said.
As ever, it's all about balance. Though Fantasia may have once been pigeonholed for its gore or scare quotient, the festival has come to be recognized as one of our city's most exciting film events, offering something for anyone willing to take a step out of the mainstream.
"Some years we lean more toward social satire, some years it's more grind horror," Davis said. "It depends what the current crop offers."
Fantasia's director of Asian programming Nicolas Archambault points to a wave of maturity in this year's programming, notably in a handful of coming-of-age films.
"It's funny to talk about maturity and coming of age," he acknowledged.
Among them is Kim Bora's first film, House of Hummingbird (July 24, 6:30 p.m., Alumni Auditorium), from South Korea, which has racked up prizes on the festival circuit.
"It's a film I adore," Archambault said, "about a young girl, in the first year of democracy in South Korea, 1993-94, and her experiments in that context, dealing with patriarchy and oppression. It's my favourite film this year."
Also from South Korea is actor Kim Yoon-seok's directorial debut, Another Child (July 14 at 4:45 p.m., July 20 at 12:50 p.m., J.A. de Sève Cinema), about two teenage girls united by an affair between their parents.
"He's one of the biggest actors in South Korea," Archambault said, adding that although Kim is known for action roles, he reveals a soft touch behind the camera, while giving himself the thankless role of the cheating father.
"Ironically, this is a very delicate, sensitive film," Archambault said, "with a lot of hope for the future in the characters of these young girls."
Japanese director Hideki Takeuchi's Fly Me to the Saitama (July 22, 6:45 p.m., Alumni Auditorium) is a zany adaptation of a 1982 manga about a student from Tokyo and a visiting student from the U.S. living outside the city centre, whose tense rivalry turns into something else entirely.
"The famous actress Fumi Nikaido plays a boy who has a crush on this boy from Saitama, so they develop a subtle homosexual relationship," Archambault said. "Imagine if Monty Python grew up in Japanese pop culture. It's very funny."
This year marks a renaissance in Asian horror, according to Archambault, who highlighted Thursday's opening film Sadako (6:30 p.m., Alumni Auditorium; repeats July 18, 12:30 p.m., J.A. de Sève Cinema), the latest instalment of the storied Ring franchise, by original director Hideo Nakata.
If that's not out-there enough for you, Ariel Esteban Cayer has a few suggestions. As director of Fantasia's Camera Lucida section, Cayer's mission is to seek out movies that push the limits of even Fantasia's boundary-bending fare.
"This year, I took some risks in terms of what people might think of as Fantasia films," he said.
Among them is a mini-retrospective of Japanese filmmaker Nao Yoshigai, whose short Grand Bouquet (July 16, 7 p.m., J.A. de Sève Cinema) screened this year as part of the Directors' Fortnight at Cannes.
"Her stuff is more in the vein of experimental cinema, but has strong fantastical elements," Cayer said. "She's a dancer and choreographer, so she brings a lot of that physicality to her films."
Saida Benzal and Armand Rovira's Letters to Paul Morrissey (July 16 at 5 p.m., July 26 at 1 p.m., J.A. de Sève Cinema) consists of a series of imaginary letters to the American film director, best known for his association with Andy Warhol.
"(Morrissey's) fictional collaborators write to him from different places in the world," Cayer said. "The vignettes are very evocative and challenging. You have Udo Kier or Andy Warhol - it's a trip through the history of avant-garde cinema."
Adilkhan Yerzhanov's Night God (July 26 at 3 p.m., Aug. 1 at 5:30 p.m., J.A. de Sève Cinema) is a rare film from Kazakhstan, about a world descending into chaos.
"It's comprised of tableaux vivants," Cayer said, "like a Peter Greenaway film, with a floating camera that brings you to this very desolate landscape with people in a small town in Kazakhstan, waiting out the end of the world."
Though Camera Lucida explores the outer limits of genre, Cayer isn't averse to movies that go for the jugular.
"Genre film is often associated with popular modes of filmmaking, which is part of what we champion," he said. "What I love most about our festival is getting to see blockbusters from Japan, Korea and China on the big screen. These are films that (in their countries) go head to head with Aladdin and Avengers."
Ultimately, he explained, there's room for everything.
"Fantasia is still very much about showcasing all kinds of genre, and imaginative cinema from all over the world."
AT A GLANCE
The Fantasia International Film Festival runs from July 11 through Aug. 1. For tickets and program information, visit fantasiafestival.com( https://fantasiafestival.com/en/ ).
tdunlevy@postmedia.com( mailto:tdunlevy@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/TChaDunlevy( https://twitter.com/TChaDunlevy )
Related
Free outdoor film screenings light up Montreal summer nights( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/movies/free-outdoor-film-screenings-light-up-montreal-summer-nights )
40th Montreal jazz festival bids an emotional au revoir( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/dunlevy-40th-montreal-jazz-festival-bids-an-emotional-au-revoir )
Nuits d'Afrique brings musical heat to Montreal streets( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/nuits-dafrique-festival-brings-musical-heat-to-montreals-streets )

