Catch up on all the big stories that happened this week in Montreal.
Quebec rock icon Marjo poses with notorious Hells Angel at party( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-star-marjo-attends-party-poses-with-notorious-hells-member )
Marjo, a.k.a., Marjolène Morin - the former member of the wildly popular Quebec group Corbeau - has been out of the limelight for quite some time. Now 66, her last album release was in 2010, when she put out Marjo et ses hommes, Vol. 2. Her heyday with Corbeau dates back further, with her popularity peaking in the 1980s and '90s, beginning with the release of the hit Illégal in 1982. It is not surprising, given her lingering popularity, to see her pop up at events and posing with fans. More surprising, perhaps, is seeing her pose, arm in arm, thumbs raised and sporting a pronounced grin with a known member of the Hells Angels. The photo features Marjo clad in leather, sitting with Serge Lebrasseur, 55, a notorious member of the biker gang wearing, well, a Hells Angels T-shirt.
Allison Hanes: Have your say on Quebec's climate policy( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-have-your-say-on-quebecs-climate-policy )
The Quebec government wants to hear from citizens about the next steps in combatting the climate crisis. The Environment Ministry has launched an online public consultation seeking your input on everything from your transportation habits to your behaviour as consumers to your efforts to reduce waste. It asks what you are doing now, what more you are prepared to do, what the barriers are to stepping up action (including outright unwillingness) and how the government should proceed, be it via financial incentives, investments in infrastructure or building public awareness. So speak up loud and clear. You can find the survey here.( http://www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca/formulaires/consultations/PECC/index.asp?fbclid=IwAR1JGlCDEIr_agswhglFjn_nW7PXi8ZQMkuHFBMuKR_WmM0ZCoDgSSwxuh8 )
Why Quebecers prefer illegal pot over going to the cannabis store( https://montrealgazette.com/cannabis/why-quebecers-prefer-illegal-pot-rather-than-going-to-the-cannabis-store )
Cannabis has been legal for a year, but 82 per cent of what Quebecers smoked still came from the black market. Why were people going underground when they had a perfectly legal option? To find out, the Montreal Gazette spoke to four everyday pot smokers who buy on the sly. They listed fast home delivery, no lineups, anonymity and better prices among their reasons for taking the illegal route. Approximately 150 tons of cannabis was consumed in Quebec in 2017, according to SQDC president and director Jean-François Bergeron in a speech last week. Yet in its first year of operations, the Société québécoise du Cannabis has sold only 27 tons. That means 123 tons of weed were sold illegally here over the past 12 months, assuming those 2017 numbers from Statistics Canada hold. "If it's not SQDC, it's not legal," Bergeron said.
Angèle says there are long waits at legal pot stores, but her dealer arrives at her house within 30 minutes.
Montreal awards urgent contract to repair deteriorating water main( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/deteriorating-downtown-water-main-supplies-1-2-million-montrealers )
It supplies water to 1.2 million residents and five hospitals, and it's crumbling. One of the city's largest water mains is being replaced( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/here-we-go-again-water-main-repairs-will-clog-traffic-beside-ville-marie-tunnel ) in a rather dramatic way, with the city calling it an urgent repair job. Because of the urgency, the city asked and received an exception from the province's environment ministry to speed up the contract awarding process. "The worst scenario is that if we don't repair it, it will explode and that can cause a huge flood in the Ville-Marie tunnel and the Orange Line of the métro," Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante said Wednesday. The pipe was shut off on July 16 after a routine inspection found it had deteriorated much quicker than expected. Executive Committee vice-president Sylvain Ouellet said the water was diverted to three smaller pipes in the network, but that's only a temporary solution.
'Do the right thing': Climate rally puts pressure on federal leaders, voters
Time is running out for the students who gathered in Jarry Park Friday to call for action against climate change. It was the last day of student protests before voters across Canada elect a new government Monday. They want the next Parliament to be one that commits to drastic measures that will cut greenhouse gas emissions. But with the looming possibility of a minority Conservative or Liberal government, they say there's a sense that Canada will continue with a decidedly tepid approach to climate action. "This is one last push, one last reminder for voters to do the right thing," said Olivia Ruge, a student at Marianopolis College. "The next four years are crucial in deciding whether we want to take steps in the right direction or go back to the way things were."

