The first severe snowstorm to hit Central Canada is delaying air travel and has caused chaos on some roads leading into Toronto.
The first severe snowstorm to hit Central Canada is delaying air travel and has caused chaos on some roads leading into Toronto.
The storm, which hit Winsdor Monday morning and travelled eastward toward Montreal, left snow, freezing rain and ice pellets after exiting the U.S. Midwest. The accumulated snowfall in some areas is expected to reach between 30 and 50 centimetres by Tuesday morning.
Air Canada officials advised Monday night that as a result of continued heavy snow in the Toronto, Ottawa and Montreal regions it planned to cancel or delay more than half its Tuesday morning flights. Travellers can call Air Canada and Canadian Airlines officials for flight information at 1-888-247-2262 before heading to the airport.
The airline expects to resume normal schedules by late Tuesday afternoon and plans to substitute larger aircraft to accommodate stranded passengers. Travellers who reschedule flights will not have to pay change fees.
Pearson International Airport official Peter Greg said that 70 per cent of Monday departures and arrivals were cancelled. Earlier in the day, an airport spokesman said the airport was as ready as it could be for the storm, and that new equipment in place allows crews to clear snow from runways in a third of the time it used to take.
But passengers weren't made to sleep at the airport overnight. Laura Cooke, a spokeswoman for Air Canada, said "we secured several hundred hotel rooms in the Toronto area to put up those whose connecting flights were cancelled."
The worst-hit area so far is a large region that includes Wingham, Stratford and Owen Sound. Wind has created drifts in the area as high as the windows of cars. Provincial police say roads are impassable, and are telling motorists not to travel in Perth, Huron, North Wellington, Bruce and Grey counties. School buses in the entire region are expected to be cancelled Tuesday.
Toronto is getting more snow and patchy freezing rain Tuesday morning on top of about 20 centimetres overnight. Plows have been out all night and major highways are generally clear. However, a number of highway ramps are blocked by jack-knifed tractor trailers.
The O-P-P have closed a section of Highway 400 North of Canal Road.
Schools are open in York Region, north of Toronto, but both the York separate and public school boards say their buses are cancelled.
Parts of Midwestern, Central and Eastern Ontario remain under a heavy snow warning. A winter storm warning remains in effect for Toronto, Hamilton, Waterloo and London as well as Halton, Peel, York and Durham. The warning has ended for Windsor, Sarnia, Brantford and Niagara.
Environment Canada says conditions will improve from west to east across the province as the day goes on. However, snowsqualls will remain a problem off of Georgian Bay and Lake Huron.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Midwest got the brunt of the storm.
Chicago's O'Hare Airport cancelled about 75 per cent of its departing flights and housed thousands of stranded travellers. Earlier Monday, a plane skidded off the runway because of the weather. The storm was felt as far south as Texas, with snow possible in El Paso, along the Mexican border.
The storm began as a jet stream hit a cold front sitting over Colorado Monday. The jet stream created a low-pressure area, where Colorado's cold air clashed with warmer air sucked in from Texas and Oklahoma. Fuelled by powerful winds, the whole weather system headed northeast toward the Great Lakes and grew in intensity.

