More than 200 Montrealers call 911, fearing smell of smoke signalled a fire in their neighbourhood
? For a few hours Monday morning, air quality monitors from Ottawa to Quebec City jumped off the charts as fickle winds blew dense plumes of forest-fire smoke up the St. Lawrence Valley.
The spike in carbon monoxide smashed smog records in Montreal and Ottawa. In Montreal, people were roused in the middle of the night by the smell of smoke and anxiously searched for fires in their neighbourhoods. More than 200 people called 911, forcing officials to prerecord a message advising callers that forest fires were the likely cause.
"We were sure something was going up in flames," said Paul Napoli, 42, who awoke around 2 a.m. and had his wife call 911, certain someone's barbeque had started a building on fire. "I'd never smelled anything so intense, even from a fire much closer."
By Monday afternoon, the winds shifted, improving air quality and sending much of the smoke back north.
The swirling winds kept a small northern Quebec native community from burning. Fire crews forced to abandon Wemotaci, about 500 kilometres north of Montreal, were again held at bay by smoke for much of Monday. But aerial surveys showed the evacuated town was still standing and, though flames continued to lick the outskirts of town, the fire appeared to be slowing down.
"We are facing monsters, it's infernal, but we sense things are calming," said Marcel Trudel of the provincial firefighting agency. "The weather seems to be turning, the wind has shifted, there's rain in the forecast, humidity will rise. That's magic for us."
While at least 18 fires have been snuffed in Quebec in recent days, the intensity of a few fires has continued to grow. Two other small communities in the centre of the province were also under partial evacuation advisories.
A look at the numbers so far:
45
The number of fires burning in Quebec. Eight of them have been classified as out of control.
2,600
The number of residents evacuated thus far from three native communities, including 1,300 from Wemotaci and hundreds more from Manawan and Obedjiwan. Many of the evacuees found shelter at a hockey arena in La Tuque, Que., which was also threatened by fire earlier in May. Others sought refuge in Roberval and Joliette. Some of the residents of Manawan have been able to return home.
269
The air quality index in one Montreal neighbourhood at 4 a.m. Monday. The figure is more than five times higher than the threshold for "poor" air quality, and more than two times worse than a record-breaking smog day in 2008. The main pollutant measured by the city was carbon monoxide.
122
The air quality index measured in Ottawa at 11 a.m., more than double the record registered in 2007. (Like Montreal, Ottawa only started keeping records in recent years.)
580
The distance, in kilometres, that the major fire zone is from Portland, Me., where authorities were inundated with complaints about the smell of the smoke emanating from Quebec. Smoke was seen as far away as Cape Cod and Nantucket, Mass., some 800 kilometres from the fires.
39,200
In hectares, the area covered by the largest of the fires, in Le-Domaine-du-Roy, north-central Quebec. The total area burned in Quebec is about 90,000 hectares - nearly twice the size of the Island of Montreal.
11
The total number of outside crews from seven states and four provinces helping fight the Quebec fires, including those from Maine, Massachusetts, Manitoba and British Columbia. Some 1,200 people are working to douse the flames assisted by 64 aircraft.
100
The overnight probability of rain, in per cent, for the area of the most serious fires. The promise of rain gave firefighters hope they might finally get an edge on the most serious blazes.

