Massive fires continue to rage in northern Quebec Tuesday, destroying so much timber that forestry companies laid off thousands of workers and belching out smoke that blankets several provinces and U.S. states.
Massive fires continue to rage in northern Quebec Tuesday, destroying so much timber that forestry companies laid off thousands of workers and belching out smoke that blankets several provinces and U.S. states.
A few millimetres of rain sprinkled overnight on the worst hot spot, about 1,000 kilometres northeast of Montreal, but it wasn't enough to stem the advancing blaze. There are now 34 fires - eight out of control - that are ripping through the province's stands of grey pine, black forest pine, spruce and other evergreens. More than 267,000 hectares of forest have been destroyed during the past week.
About 500 firefighters, with 16 water bombers and 50 helicopters, are battling the fires, but water bombers have had almost no effect on some of the biggest blazes, where the heat is so intense that the water turns to steam before it hits the embers.
Two of the worst fires each stretch over more than 100,000 hectares, or 1,000 square kilometres - an area more than twice as large as the Island of Montreal.
Last night's rain had a slight impact, but firefighters don't expect any real relief from the weather until Thursday, said a spokeswoman for the province's forest protection services.
"[The rain]did help them get closer to the big ones, so it's a little easier to work on the fire, but they're waiting for more rain in two days," Charlotte Léger told globeandmail.com.
Timber giants Abitibi-Consolidated, Domtar Inc. and about 23 other forestry companies have been forced to temporarily lay off 6,000 workers because they can't get into the affected areas, which have been closed by the provincial government.
The fires have created an enormous cloud of gray haze as wide as 400 kilometres that has blocked the sun as far east as the Maritimes and south to Washington, D.C.
A number of communities have issued health warnings, including Quebec City and St. John, N.B., warning children, the elderly and people with respiratory problems to stay indoors.

