Dorval Mayor Edgar Rouleau knows people are nervous. Around 20 mm of rain was forecast to fall Tuesday through Wednesday. The ground is frozen solid. Ice and snow abound. Temperatures are above normal. And memories of record-breaking spring flooding in 2017 are still fresh.
"The trucks are loaded with bags and public works is monitoring the (lake) water levels closely," Rouleau said. "We want people to know we are ready for action."
Dorval uses crushed stone instead of the conventional sand. The stone is crushed finely enough to pack well and prevent water seepage.
Rouleau said the city has more than 800 bags at the ready. Last year, at the peak of the flooding, the city had distributed between 500 and 550 bags. The mayor said some citizens opted to keep the bags they used last spring.
"We only had a handful of homes affected by flooding last year and most of them had slanted driveways," Rouleau said. "Those homes are a priority because they are the most vulnerable."
International Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence River Board spokesman Jacob Bruxer said Lac St. Louis is 35 cm higher than usual for this time of year, but that there remains 40 additional centimetres of wiggle room before there is any danger of flooding and that regulating the outflow at the Moses-Saunders Dam near Cornwall, Ont. would prevent the lake water from reaching that danger point.
Bruxer said the heavy rains in March and April of last year were the tipping point that unleashed the massive spring flooding. He said that a spate of heavy rain like the region experienced last year is impossible to predict so far in advance, but that the situation is well under control at this stage.
Pierrefonds-Roxboro Mayor Jim Beis( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pierrefonds-roxboro-monitoring-riviere-des-prairies-water-levels ) told the West Island Gazette last month that a series of measures were already being put in place in at points in the borough most vulnerable to flooding. Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue Mayor Paola Hawa said water levels are being rigorously monitored and that an information session for citizens concerning flood preparedness will be held in March. Date to be determined.
Lakes are not the only source of flooding. Overflowing sewage and storm-water pipes also wreaked havoc last spring( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/ile-bizard-family-still-reeling-after-spring-flood-damages-home ).
"Public works has been out clearing ice away from manholes and out of pipes," Rouleau said. "(On Monday) we received between 45 and 50 calls from residents. Some just needed reassurance that we were doing something to prepare for flooding. Others reported water accumulating in the streets."
Rouleau said the preparations( http://montrealgazette.com/news/montreal-was-ill-prepared-for-spring-flooding-city-report-shows ) in Dorval are not only for this week's thaw and rain, but for the spring thaw on the way.
"People are anxious," he said. "They can call us. We are ready to help."
For information, call 514-633-4046.
kgreenaway@postmedia.com( mailto:kgreenaway@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Kathryn Greenaway, Montreal Gazette

