Coronavirus updates, June 22: For first time since March, Quebec reports no new deaths
Today's coronavirus updates all in one place.
Dining out: Montreal restaurants start carefully reopening
Restaurants in Montreal began opening on Monday, welcoming customers to sit and have a meal for the first time since March. Owners greeted the reopening with a mixture of excitement and fear. Sales have shrunk during the shutdown, buoyed only by takeout orders. Many owners who spoke to the Montreal Gazette on Monday were hopeful patrons would feel comfortable enough to sit in a restaurant despite sanitary measures.
Unbearably hot inside? Go outside - even if you have COVID-19: authorities
People who are quarantined at home with COVID-19 are supposed to stay there, say public health authorities - unless their place is unbearably hot, that is.
Analysis: Legault uses cabinet shuffle to address weakness in health system
In politics, it is known as changing the message by changing the messengers. As illogical as it seems to dump your seasoned health minister during a pandemic at the risk of disappointing the very devoted incumbent - which is exactly what has happened - Premier François Legault on Monday showed how far he is willing to go to get his second wind for the difficult fall ahead.
Good Samaritans bringing cool comfort to Montreal seniors
Betty Esperanza took the first phone call at 8:30 a.m. Sunday morning. Over the next 12 hours, she processed 43 requests for air conditioners from vulnerable seniors who were sweltering during the second heat wave to hit Montreal in more than a month.
What's open and closed on the Fête Nationale on June 24
Here's a partial list of what will be open and closed in Montreal during the Fête Nationale on Wednesday, June 24.
Brownstein: Another city landmark, Tony Shoes, closes shop
No sooner did Tony Fargnoli open his shop Monday morning, he noticed his voice mail was overloaded. Upon checking his computer, he was stunned to learn a message he left on Facebook Sunday already had over 35,000 shares. The message was a brief mention that after 83 years, Tony Shoes on Greene Ave. was closing. The voicemails were from longtime customers, devastated by the news.
Montreal says it will review procedures on land repossessions
The administration of Mayor Valérie Plante says it's touched by the plight of elderly property owners who had their land taken by the city without their knowledge three years ago and is promising to review the city's procedures and the recourse available to citizens to prevent a repeat in the future.

