QUEBEC - It's pretty safe to say that Premier François Legault would rather not be managing the consequences of a virus which has killed 5,780 Quebecers and disrupted the entire province in its wake.
With the number of COVID-19 cases stubbornly refusing to drop, the economy and Montreal stuggling, a historic $14.9 billion provincial deficit and a health system still on high alert, Legault's government finds itself, mid-way through its four-year mandate, stuck in a perpetual state of crisis management.
In other words, this is not at all what the Coalition Avenir Québec signed up for when they won the election Oct. 1, 2018.
Worse. Unlike other catastrophes such as the 1998 ice storm, nobody really knows when this will end and life will return to normal.
Instead of confidently preparing the ground for the 2022 election, the daily routine for Legault and his cabinet - now six months into managing Quebec during a pandemic - has become navigating uncertainty at the same time as running a government.
One week it is announcing rules about masks. Another, a program to train 10,000 orderlies to work in the CHSLD network. Two weeks ago it was the creation of an alert system to indicate the severity of COVID-19 per region.
The list goes on and on with staff in various ministries working full out. The costs rise and so does the worry and pressure to make the right decisions in a volatile climate.
"We are at war with an invisible enemy and we have to review the priorities and the ways of doing things taking into consideration this reality," a top Legault aide said in a telephone interview when asked if the battle is taking its toll.
"There's not too much time for soul searching. You have to react. It comes with the job."
The aide summed up the government's priority list for the remaining two years before the election this way: limiting the damage of the pandemic and finding ways to relaunch the economy.
Somewhere amid the resurging pandemic, the CAQ hopes to proceed with its political and legislative agenda. Top of the list will be a "re-draft" of Bill 61, the legislation fast-tracking public infrastructure projects such as roads, hospitals and senior's residences.
The original bill, which is supposed to counteract the economic slowdown caused by the pandemic, failed last June when the opposition blocked it.
The CAQ's environment minister, Benoit Charette, also plans to table his long-awaited "plan for a green economy," which was delayed by the pandemic.
The legislature resumes sitting Tuesday for the fall season.
"I'm optimistic that we'll be able to respect all our promises during the four-year mandate," Legault said at a news conference Friday when asked how disruptive recent events have been. "Of course the next weeks are a big challenge but we're a lot better prepared today than we were six months ago."
He repeated Quebec needs to get the number of new cases under control and that will require discipline.
"I don't think we'll come back to 800 or 1,000 cases a day but nobody can be sure of what's coming next," Legault said.
In the last few weeks, Legault - a man who admits he's not the most patient guy in the world - has expressed frustration with the minority of Quebecers who don't see COVID-19 as a threat or believe like some Americans that it is a conspiracy.
"There are some people who believe Elvis (Presley) is still alive and that the Earth is not round," Legault said in August when asked about anti-mask demonstrators.
He is also unhappy that some Quebecers are ignoring the rules and still holding house parties. To some extent, however, he knows his hands are tied.
"We can't put a police officer in every home in Quebec," Legault said in remarks to the CAQ caucus Friday.
There are rumours Legault will go a step further and make a fresh appeal for Quebecers to show solidarity in the form of a speech to Quebecers in the legislature or in a video.
Without actually putting any public blame on her shoulders, Premier François Legault transferred Danielle McCann out of the health portfolio in a June cabinet shuffle. In her place is Christian Dubé, the no-nonsense former president of the Treasury Board.
The province has entered what is actually a more complicated phase of the pandemic for the government - one where the flare ups are no longer mostly in public long-term care centres (CHSLDs) and no longer only concentrated in Montreal.
"We're not out of the woods yet," the aide said. "Nobody is declaring victory."
So what leads the government to say it is better prepared? Here are some key differences since last March.
A new health and social services minister: Without actually putting any public blame on her shoulders, Legault transferred Danielle McCann out of the health portfolio in a June cabinet shuffle. In her place is Christian Dubé, the no-nonsense former president of the Treasury Board.
Personal protective equipment (PPE): Legault has repeated many times that Quebec never ran short of masks, gloves and gowns in the first wave but has admitted there were distribution problems. Legault said he wanted to make Quebec more self-sufficient as well. In his action plan for a second wave, Dubé said Quebec will be signing agreements with Quebec suppliers of PPE to avoid being at the mercy of foreign companies. At a legislature committee in August, Dubé revealed Quebec now has in hand a 60-day supply of N-95 masks. Later, he said Quebec is aiming for a 6-month total supply.
CHSLD staffing: It was Quebec's weakest link in the first wave of the virus. The premier vowed to correct staffing problems in public long-term care residences. After pledging to hire 10,000 more orderlies and patient assistants, Quebec launched a paid fast-track training program which ran all summer. As a result, a total of 7,100 orderlies and patient attendants are being deployed in residences.
Testing has improved: The province's original target was to be able to conduct 14,000 tests a day but it rarely hit that number in the first wave. That started to change in May and June as systems improved and more people came forward. On Friday, Sept. 11, Quebec set a new record with 26,000 tests in one day. Wait times have also improved and are now down to between 24 and 72 hours.
Ironically, as is often the case for leaders in a crisis, Legault, still has widespread public support for his actions. A Léger poll conducted last week for Journal de Montréal and Journal de Québec pegged support for the CAQ at a massive 48 per cent.
The Liberals were second with 22 per cent support, the Parti Québécois with 17 per cent and Québec solidaire, 11 per cent.
Better still for Legault, his approval rating for his handling of the pandemic is 76 per cent.
"Because of the COVID-19 crisis, the Legault government had an unusually long post-electoral honeymoon," said Daniel Béland, director of the McGill Institute for the Study of Canada.
A swift economic recovery would help the CAQ in the long run but a lasting health crisis - especially a new shutdown - could have the opposite effect, he added.
But after supporting the government in the early part of the pandemic, the three opposition parties plan to change channel during this session, with more questions about the CAQ's handling of events.
Liberal Leader Dominique Anglade, who has harshly criticized Legault for the pandemic, said two weeks ago she will be pressuring Legault because she does not believe Quebec is ready for a potential second wave.
On Monday, PQ leader Pascal Bérubé said he will be presenting a motion Tuesday in the legislature calling for a complete independent inquiry into the way the pandemic evolved, as Ontario is doing.
"When you are 23 per cent of the (Canadian) population and have 63 per cent of the deaths, that is noting to be proud of," Bérubé said at a news conference.
pauthier@postmedia.com
Twitter.com/philipauthier
Related
Tough-talking Legault cracks down on people who break mask rules
Allison Hanes: The future is in Quebecers' frequently washed hands
On the six-month anniversary of the start of the lockdown in Quebec, the Montreal Gazette's reporting team looks at the changes the pandemic has wrought, and what it will mean for the future of the province. This is the third instalment in the series.
Part One:Six months in: How the pandemic has transformed Quebec
Part Two: Allison Hanes on our collective grief
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here



