To achieve Nordic nirvana on the doorsteps of Canada's
Nothing in the urban world compares with Canada's Nordic ski trails. They wind through forests, along streams, down mountain pitches, and take you soaring into valleys and flying onto plateaus.
Climb up to a vista, open the trail mix and water bottle with a group of friends, and then swoosh down the other side. Here's an assortment of trails that won't disappoint. Start your snow dance now. Near TorontoHardwood Hills: If Highway 400 is clear of snow, Torontonians can make it in less than two hours. It has a barn, wax horses, irons for waxing, snow-making equipment and 42 kilometres of trails with loops from three to 15 kilometres for both skating and classic styles. All trails except the recreational Pine Trail are challenging with hills such as the Elevator, Eliminator, Terminator, Black Hole, Waterfall, Stairway to Heaven, and Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
Drawback? At $16.50, the trail fees are a little steep, considering there are many free public ski trails and some cross-country facilities charge as little as $4. But quality trail maintenance is guaranteed. Hardwood also attracts certain Type A skiers -- guys in Lycra who think every day is race day. Two of my fave guys to ski with there, Mike and Peter, are perfect examples. We arrive as early as possible, do a minimum of 40 kilometres, with our heart rates one beat below aerobic meltdown.
Snow is usually ready in early December and stays until the Spring Fling Relay (March 24). The Hardwood Hundred (25, 50 or 100 kms), which is also the Cancer Society Skiathon, is on March 3.
Horseshoe Resort: Ski trails here wind their way around the alpine centre. The hills are as impressive now as when I first skied them as a teenager. There are 35 kilometres of classic trails and a limited number of skating trails. The atmosphere is low-key compared with the testosterone-driven Hardwood scene nearby. The trails are narrow, pretty and wind through the Copeland Forest. Expert means expert, as the climbs and descents are hair-raising and fantastic.
Highlands Nordic: Farther from Toronto but worth the drive. Despite high-tech snow-making and grooming, it still feels rustic and homey. The 12-kilometre red trail winds up the Niagara Escarpment for a lung-bursting, nirvana-inducing state of mind. Once you hit the plateau, there's a beautiful agricultural area to wander through, followed by an S-turn descent that provides enough momentum to take you back to the lodge. The looped-trail system allows for mix and match. Start on the red, switch to blue, finish on yellow. All junctions are well marked. Great food. Don't miss the butter tarts.
Near Montreal/OttawaQuebec trails: Thanks to the European flavour of sports in Quebec and the influence of Norwegian legend Jack Rabbit Johannsen, the province is laced with thousands of kilometres of life-altering ski trails. Quebec has consistently put many Nordic skiers on national teams because trails are either free or nominally priced.
Every time I stay in Montreal, I jog over, skis in hand, to Mount Royal where the trails are beautiful, free, well-groomed and lit for night skiing. Trails in Quebec City are even more extensive, but it's the trails in the national and provincial parks that are so captivating.
Gatineau Park: Located outside Hull, it has 200 kilometres of trails, most providing skating and classic. The entire parkway is turned into groomed trails, with twisting, turning subtrails that wander into the woods. While this is skier's heaven, there are few amenities such as restaurants and lodges, though plenty of places to stay in the region.
Daily passes are available at the park's 16 parking lots and the visitor centre in Chelsea, all giving direct access to the trails. S easonal passes are $85. There's room to change into ski clothes at the visitor centre and eat a packed lunch. It has no food, but restaurants are nearby. The National Capital Commission has converted a barn into a waxing hut. While amenities aren't luxurious, there are four huts on the trails that provide a stove and wood. Grab a map to find them, and look for Keogan, Huron, Western and McKinstry Lodges when you want a trail break.
The park's biggest event is the Keskinada Loppet, an international tour/race that attracts thousands of skiers on Feb. 15-17.
Near CalgaryCanmore Nordic Centre: A mere 100 kilometres from Calgary, it is a legacy from the 1988 Olympics, so the trails meet international standards. None are flat, though I would rank the Banff Trail as beginner to intermediate. If you've just arrived, you'll also have to adjust to the altitude.
Stop at Books and Bagels on Canmore's Main Street for early breakfast. The service -- by spaced-out grunge kids -- is deplorable. But a delicious toasted bagel with cheese, and one of those mile-high muffins will take you up the steepest of climbs, and there's a great selection of books and magazines.
I enjoy skiing here, especially early in the season when the snow is artificial. But like Ontario's Hardwood Hills, it attracts its share of Type As, who suffer through stern training regimes, and never go to interesting films. Makes for limited conversation. The 70 kilometres of killer trails are poorly marked, so get a map.
Kananaskis Country: Come here for 160 kilometres of free trails. My favourites are in Peter Lougheed Park, where 97.2 kilometres wind around forests, streams and mountains. Take the Trans-Canada west from Calgary to Highway 40, which leads past Mount Allen, site of the 1988 Olympic alpine events, and Nakiska Ski Village. Eventually, the winter road ends at a gate, where you turn right to reach the Pocaterra entrance to the trails.
You've got to know how to ski here: There are no rentals, lessons or ski patrollers to search for your body. Pocaterra Lodge is a lovely chalet with washrooms, tables and chairs, but no refreshments or wax. Bring plenty of food and pay attention to where you are. With high altitudes and potentially very cold temperatures, fabulous downhills and plenty of junctions, it's easy to get lost when you're a little dehydrated or hypothermic. The temperature can rise by 10 Celsius degrees in one hour once the sun peaks above the mountains, so don't despair if it's -30 at 9:30 a.m. By 11, it could be a balmy -18.
Of all the great trails here, Fox Run is the most fun. As you funnel onto its narrow woodsy corridor, you've got plenty of speed from the last downhill.
Plan your visit so you can enter the Great Cookie Race, organized by Foothills Nordic Ski Club on Feb. 23 (24 or 42 kilometres with shorter distances for children). At checkpoints, there are homemade cookies, and at the finish there's a big tent with plenty of soup, hot chocolate and cookies.
Kananaskis Country Ski Trails Ski Trails in the Canadian Rockies Banff National Park: All trails are free. Despite the death of skier Frances Frost last year because of a cougar attack, the Cascade Fire Road Trail (either skating or classic skiing) is still a beauty. Head north from Banff and follow directions to Lake Minnewanka. Park where the road ends at a gate. Don't ski alone. Animal attacks are rare, but hypothermia, especially during mountain storms, is more common. It's five kilometres to the first bridge, with plenty of climbing, and nine more kilometres to the Stoney Creek Bridge, where the trail also splits to the left and ends at the warden's cabin. Incredible vistas.
My favourite quick ski, the Spray Trail, starts behind the Banff Springs Conference Centre and runs beside the Spray River for five kilometres, at which point you can turn left, cross the bridge and come back on the other side for another five kilometres. Plenty of ups and downs that aren't a problem as long as the trail is well-groomed. Sometimes people walk their dogs and wreck it. After your ski, saunter into the Banff Springs Hotel and head to the Rundle Café for nourishment and the view.
Get a map or tour leader for the Sundance Canyon Trail: You don't want to be lost in the bush. But check it out on the last Saturday in January when it's the final section of the Lake Louise-to-Banff Loppet and Relay, a 65-kilometre individual or team event sponsored by the Banff SkiRunners.
Lake Louise: And now for my true love, again at no cost. Moraine Lake Road is one of three trailheads, all with great skiing.
These trails, with my new skiing buddies, Harry, Bob, and Ross, are sweet. Our favourite route is to ski to the top of the road, which is eight kilometres, mainly climbing, see if we have a good view of Seven Peaks, zip up our jackets, pull our tuques securely over our ears, and bolt back down the hill. After skiing six kilometres back down, we hang left onto the classic Fairview Loop, which eventually leads to Chateau Lake Louise. We continue to loop back to Moraine Lake though, because there are two excellent downhills that take us flying through the forest. The trail spits us out onto the road again and we continue down to the bottom. Fairview is not quite five kilometres one-way. You can break it up and stop at the Chateau for a snack, or take the shorter and more gentle Tramline Trail back to Moraine Lake. Just look for the signs.
When you're famished after a day on the trails, grab a table at Laggan's Bakery in the Village of Lake Louise, and order one of everything including a sticky cinnamon bun. There is also the Lake Louise Hostel, which is considered the Hyatt of hostels -- café, kitchen, sauna, international skiers, fabulous loft with cozy couches where you can crash with a good book.
Near VancouverCypress Lake Provincial Park: A 40-minute drive from downtown Vancouver, the park offers 16 kilometres of ski trails. The temperature, which hovers around 0 C, makes for klister (wet snow) waxing conditions. But the trails are groomed for classic and skating at Hollyburn Ridge.
I'd stick to skating or use non-wax skis. Cross the Lion's Gate Bridge and then go north on Taylor Way and take the Upper Level highway to the Cypress Park turnoff. Continue about four kilometre to Hollyburn Ridge.
My Vancouver friends say this isn't their first choice. There's plenty of up and down, and potentially icy conditions, but the lit trails are perfect for after-work workouts. There's also a huge Jack Rabbit program for children.
Manning Provincial Park: It is at least a three-hour drive from the city, but is considered a paradise. Go east on the Trans-Canada to Hope and then follow Highway 3. As you climb 1,300 metres and move into an interior climate, the warm, wet stuff of the coast will transform into nice, cold, spiky snowflakes.
The best way to do this trip is with Sigge's Sports Villa, (604) 731-8818. Its day trips to the park commence the first Sunday in December and run through March. It will load up to three coaches, at a cost of $39 a person, which includes transportation and trail fee. If you're a beginner, for $79 you can have this, plus rentals and instruction. Frequent-user passes also available.
Whistler: Keep Saturday open to try B.C.'s best-kept secret -- the 29 kilometres of Lost Lake trails just north of Whistler (about 140 kilometres from Vancouver). Signs at the base of Blackcomb point to the trails, both skating and classic. Anders Bjorklund of Sigge's says these are the best trails within a day's drive of the city, but the season here is short, starting in January and usually wrapping up by the end of February. Don't miss the Chateau Whistler Loppet, Jan. 27, a 36-kilometre tour/race. Starting the beginning of January, Siegi's does Saturday Lost Lake trips. Call for trip updates and other information.
Waxing tips If you want to figure out where you should Nordic ski this winter, and what kind of skiing to do, just imagine you are a snowflake -- with six nice little spiky points that catch the wax on the bottom of skis.
That way, you can decide whether you will classic-ski, skate-ski or both. When the wax and the snowflakes are well matched, the little spikes dig into the wax and provide enough grip to kick the ski forward and glide over the water you make with the friction of your kick. This is classic skiing, and works best in cold or dry snow.
But, as moisture and temperature increases -- as is the case in Southern Ontario -- those nice little spikes become rounded. So, even when the temperature is -5 C, which means blue or blue special wax, they're acting as if they're only -2 C, which is blue extra, purple special, or even purple wax, or if you've switched to fluro-carbon waxes, VR 45 and VR50.
Or, if the snowflake has melted and now it's turned to granular ice, wax won't work at all, and that old sticky friend in a tube called klister must be used for a mucky grip.
Waxing nightmare? If you're not familiar with wax and snow, it can be, and that's why people in soggy Southern Ontario and Vancouver have taken up skate skiing, a motion that uses only glide wax, as opposed to grip wax, and can be learned by anyone who grew up on a pair of ice or in-line skates. All you need is a lesson or two and tree trunks for thighs. The beautiful old tradition of classic skiing -- with grip wax -- still works perfectly in the dry or colder areas in the North and West.
Don't let the waxing jargon intimidate you. I have logged most of my skiing kilometres on the humid trails of Southern Ontario, and the vast majority have been skating since 1985, when it became popular.

