Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante is no Scrooge this holiday season. She is doling out the Christmas goodies right here in the West Island.
This month, the city of Montreal announced it is purchasing 22 hectares of land in the southwest part of Ile-Bizard and three hectares in the Bois-de-l'Ile-Bizard Nature Park, news welcomed by nature enthusiasts and conservationists. Shortly after this jolly piece of news, a second announcement was made regarding the purchase of 140 hectares in the western sector of Pierrefonds-Roxboro.
Add this to the 10 hectares of natural habitat in Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue purchased in October and we are getting closer to the realization of the Grand Parc de l'Ouest, which will comprise 3,000 hectares (7,413 acres) of land, of which 1,600 includes existing nature parks in Anse-à-l'Orme, Bois-de-L'Île-Bizard, Bois-de-la-Roche, Cap-St-Jacques, Morgan Arboretum and Rapides-du-Cheval-Blanc.
The Grand Parc de l'Ouest( https://www.realisonsmtl.ca/grandparcouest ), or Great Western Park, comes with bragging rights. It will be the largest municipal park in Canada; eight times larger than New York City's Central Park. Preservation of these habitats will not only protect green space and wildlife, but wetlands also help to mitigate some of the dangers of flooding( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/how-lessons-learned-from-2017-flood-helped-spare-pierrefonds-roxboro ) by acting as a kind of absorbent sponge. Whatever the reason behind this project, I for one am thrilled that I will be able to roam through these protected spaces for years to come.
Related
Montreal purchases 140 hectares in western Pierrefonds from Grilli( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/montreal-purchases-140-hectares-in-western-pierrefonds-from-grilli )
Île-Bizard land acquired for Montreal's ambitious Grand Parc de l'Ouest( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/montreal-acquires-25-hectares-in-ile-bizard-for-great-western-park )
A magical coach house Christmas at Dorval Museum( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/a-magical-coach-house-christmas-at-dorval-museum )
West Island mayors weigh in on threatened urban park lawsuit( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/west-island-mayors-weigh-in-on-threatened-urban-park-lawsuit )
More from Suzanne Korf, Special to the West Island Gazette( https://montrealgazette.com/author/suzanne-korf-special-to-the-montreal-gazette )
Cross-country skiing and tobogganing are among the winter activities seen at Cap-St-Jacques Nature Park in Pierrefonds.
One of my favourite winter activities is cross-country skiing at Cap St-Jacques. Last year, the skiing conditions were not ideal as snowfalls were followed by freezing rain. According to weather forecasts, this year doesn't look more promising. Each year there is less and less snow. It is predicted that in 30 years white Christmases( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/dont-expect-too-many-more-white-christmases-in-montreal ) will be a thing of the past.
Maybe I should just stay home and curl up next to a warm fire. I was a bit confused about whether I could still use my fireplace this winter and looked it up online. It appears that in most West Island municipalities, we may continue to use our existing wood burning stoves and fireplaces, thanks to a grandfather clause, although some municipalities prohibit the use of a fireplace as a primary source of heating.
While researching this, however, I learned that a conventional wood stove or fireplace burning( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreals-wood-burning-ban-starts-oct-1-what-you-need-to-know ) for nine hours emits as many fine particles as a car does in a year, and that these fine particles penetrate deep into the lungs and seep into the bloodstream, with major repercussions on people's health. No pun intended, but it puts a "damper" on the joy of watching the flames of a crackling fire.
If we don't get some snow, I think I will just slap some crampons on my boots, go for a walk in the neighbourhood and enjoy the Christmas lights and decorations. The city of Pointe-Claire did a nice job lighting up Valois Village this year. I can do a bit of shopping and listen to some music during my stroll - maybe Bing Crosby's "I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas." Happy holidays!
- Suzanne Korf, a Pointe-Claire resident, is a professional fundraiser who has worked for non-profit organizations for more than 25 years. She is a senior director of development for the Montreal Children's Hospital Foundation.

