Beaconsfield Mayor Georges Bourelle says the provincial government's handling of its flood map roll out is an indication the West Island is not a priority for Premier François Legault and his Coalition Avenir Quebec government.
Bourelle is still frustrated with CAQ's handling of the newly revised flood map( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/quebec-flood-map-remains-inaccurate-say-west-island-mayors ) which still has more than 150 Beaconsfield homes within the government's special zone d'intervention spécial (ZIS) for floods.
The Quebec government's preliminary map, which came out in June, shows flood zones in Dorval. A revised version of the map was then released mid-July.
For those residents, located mostly on waterfront properties along Lake St. Louis, it puts a freeze on building, renovating or making major changes to their properties.
Although the city of Beaconsfield recently passed a resolution to "urgently reiterate its request to the Quebec government to exclude 152 homes erroneously included in the special planning zone for floods," Bourelle said the provincial government's handing of the file has left him dumbfounded.
"This whole thing is a comedy of errors," the mayor said. "The first map was absolutely atrocious. It was a total botched-up job. Then they come up with a second map, and you can't understand the logic of the second one. Because if you're going to remove 45 residences in Beaconsfield (from the map), why 45 and not all of them?
"We're either in the flood zone or we're not," he added. "There's no difference between the 45 and the others. So it's equally as botched-up. I don't think they know what they're doing, quite frankly."
Bourelle didn't hold back in his assessment of Quebec's bureaucracy.
"Everything that's happening is confirming my suspicion they have no idea what they're doing. They will not share with anybody their rationale, or how they did this, except that they took a plane and flew over. Well that's not a great way of identifying a flood zone."
Bourelle suggested the CAQ may be more interested in sorting out the problems of communities outside of Montreal, which supported the CAQ in the 2018 provincial election."For me to make that conclusion, I think, would not be the right thing to do. But my observation is they seemed to have addressed issues must faster in the 450 than they have in the 514. So based on that observation, you have to wonder why they're doing it.
"They (exempted) Ste-Marthe-sur-le-lac from the flood map. But Ste-Marthe-sur-le-lac was flooded. How can they go slow quickly and decide to remove Ste-Marthe-sur-le-lac, which is a CAQ area?"
He noted that Beaconsfield properties that still fall within the flood map did not flood in either 2017 or 1019.
Asked if it was just bureaucratic bungling or political overtones at play in the flood map, Bourelle replied: "Well, you have to wonder because why are they going about it the way they are?
"You have to wonder if they are more conscious about protecting areas more favourable to the CAQ than others?
"Mind you, having said that, it's no different, in a way, than the Liberals behaved when they're in power. They take for granted the West Island anyway. When the Liberals are there, they take for granted the West Island because (they always vote Liberal). So no issues are taken care of by the Liberals either because, what the hell, they're going to get their votes anyway."
"So we're in a helluva position in the West Island," added the mayor. "The Liberals take us for granted, the péquistes will never do anything for the West Island because they know they've written us off, and it looks like the CAQ is writing us off, as well. So, poor West Island."
Last Friday, Bourelle said he has written two letters to Andrée Laforest, Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing, but has not heard back. .
"I have written her two letters. Last one was 15(th) of July, asking for a meeting. I didn't hear boo from her. I would've expected, out of respect, for the minister to respond to my letters. That's a minimum. Or just a phone call . . . but nothing."
A political attaché for Laforest defended the province's handling of the file last week( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/municipal-affairs-ministry-defends-new-quebec-flood-risk-map ). Alexandre Lambert told the Montreal Gazette that water levels on Lake St. Louis were "very high this year. Maybe there are areas in the West Island that were not touched, but there are sectors that are lying lower that were touched. We're working with the tools we have."
The province is still accepting requests for map revisions from residents until Aug. 19, before issuing a third and final map in September.
Meantime, Beaconsfield has also mandated a law firm to determine "legal options failing the withdrawal of the falsely identified properties in Beaconsfield."
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
Related
Quebec flood map remains inaccurate, say West Island mayors( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/quebec-flood-map-remains-inaccurate-say-west-island-mayors )
'Until the flood map is sorted,' Pierrefonds' Bar Chez Paul remains open( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pierrefonds-watering-hole-bar-chez-paul-remains-open )
Municipal affairs ministry defends new Quebec flood-risk map( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/municipal-affairs-ministry-defends-new-quebec-flood-risk-map )
West Island officials upset by change in policy for flood-risk map( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-officials-upset-by-change-in-policy-for-flood-risk-map )
From milkman to Quebec premier: François Legault's rise to power( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/from-milkman-to-quebec-premier-francois-legaults-rise-to-power )
Preliminary flood zone map is 'ridiculous', Dorval mayor says( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/preliminary-flood-zone-map-is-ridiculous-dorval-mayor-says )
Kramberger: Room for improvement in revised flood maps( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/kramberger-room-for-improvement-in-revised-flood-maps )

