Verdun Hospital has been hit with the most severe outbreak of COVID-19( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/q-and-a-what-to-do-if-you-think-you-have-covid-19/ ) to date of any acute-care facility in the city, with as many as 35 patients infected, five doctors sent home for self-isolation, along with an undisclosed number of other health workers also contracting the coronavirus.
As Montreal struggles with 20 COVID-19 outbreaks in long-term care centres, up from 13 on Wednesday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-outbreaks-have-hit-13-long-term-care-centres-in-montreal/ ), the pandemic has now spread to two general hospitals, the city's director of public health confirmed on Thursday. Dr. Mylène Drouin declined to name the other hospital. but the Montreal Neurogical Hospital was hit with an outbreak a week ago.
"Everyone is terrified, overwhelmed by the situation, to see that the virus is now widespread," Dr. François Plante, a lung specialist who practises at Verdun Hospital, told the Montreal Gazette.
Plante, 74, was not exposed to the outbreak since he has been confined to his home as a precaution after Premier François Legault on March 14 called on all Quebecers who are at least 70 years old to stay home. But Plante warned the outbreak will probably strain the already stretched resources of the hospital.
"The impact is certainly disastrous because of this illness," he said. "It's appalling."
There were actually two COVID-19 clusters declared at the hospital on LaSalle Blvd. The first was discovered after doctors developed symptoms of the respiratory illness while conducting rounds on a floor. But authorities have not been able to identify the source of the second cluster in the same facility.
As soon as the doctors tested positive, every patient in the hospital was also tested. That yielded the result of 35 infected patients, some of whom are asymptomatic.
Verdun Hospital staff are now testing every patient for COVID-19 upon admission.
All 35 patients have been isolated in a so-called hot zone. The hospital has a total of 244 beds.
"It's not the doctors' fault, as they were (initially) asymptomatic, but it's a possible reason for the outbreak," said Jean-Nicolas Aubé, a spokesperson for the health authority in charge of the hospital.
"We really don't want fingers pointed at our doctors," Aubé added. "Their work is essential. The minute they showed symptoms, they stopped working immediately."
Staff are now testing every patient for COVID-19 upon admission to the hospital. The reason is that some of the 35 infected patients might have contracted COVID-19 in the community and were asymptomatic when they checked into the hospital for a different medical reason.
Of the five doctors who are in self-isolation at home, two have tested positive. The three others are at home because of their exposure to the sites of the contagion. They will have to test negative two times after 14 days of isolation before they can return to work.
Other health-care workers have been sent home, too, Plante said. Aubé was unable to confirm whether other workers at the hospital are in self-isolation, but he estimated that as many as 100 health employees in the Centre-Sud region that includes Verdun have tested positive for COVID-19.
Drouin urged health workers who have flu-like or respiratory symptoms not to show up for work. Although authorities are giving priority to health professionals for testing, she explained that Quebec's screening test is not sensitive enough to detect a COVID-19 infection in someone who is asymptomatic.
"I don't have all the details about what happened at Verdun," Drouin told reporters at a news conference. "As you know, we have outbreaks in a couple of hospitals right now."
The Montreal Neurological Hospital reported an outbreak a week ago( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-hit-with-two-covid-19-outbreaks-31-health-workers-infected/ ). Admissions were suspended until further notice and some activities were redirected to the Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM). Officials at the McGill University Health Centre - which oversees the Neuro - have refused to make public the number of patients who were infected.
The two hospital outbreaks underscore the enormous challenges health workers face in treating patients during the pandemic, including extreme fatigue and the ever-present risk of contracting the highly contagious coronavirus. Research has shown the novel virus - known as SARS-CoV-2 - can last on some surfaces for up to three days.
aderfel@postmedia.com( mailto:aderfel@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel( http://twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel )
Related
A timeline of the novel coronavirus in Quebec( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/a-timeline-of-the-novel-coronavirus-in-quebec )
Coronavirus: What you need to know( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-qa-what-you-should-know )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow their updates on April 2 right here.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-ottawa-braces-for-flood-of-calls-for-financial-help ) All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).

