The time has come to start thinking of the Christmas tree.
As someone who has used an artificial tree for years, I am considering a real tree this year. I think there is something authentic in style and scent that intrigues me this holiday season, and I am finally willing to give the real thing a try.
What I have enjoyed about artificial trees (I like to call them everlastings) is the guarantee of a tree that was the right height, and the convenience of having all the lights attached. What I didn't like is the lack of real-tree smell and the storage of the tree/hockey bag throughout the year. So, with saw in hand and a sturdy tree stand, I'm all set to tackle a new tradition. Whether you drive to the nearest tree-cutting farm or the local home decor centre, there's bound to be a tree that sings Oh, Tannenbaum to you this holiday season.
Here are my tips for deciding between the two. There's no wrong answer if you choose what's right for you.
The real thing
Is there anything more festive than a real Christmas tree with its fresh scent? These pros and cons will help you decide if a real tree is right for your home.
PROS: Many real trees are grown near the market they are sold in, and so support the local economy. If well cared for, the scent a real tree brings inside the home (and the tree itself) can last throughout the holiday season. You can choose a tree that's a different species, height and scent each year, which is good for people like me who like change (a lot).
CONS: The cost of a real tree can vary, ranging from about $40 to $100 per year. That's my coffee allowance for a month so I'm gonna have to adjust to stay on budget. Getting a real tree home and setting it up can be a pain for car-free types like me; that's where a handy friend with a vehicle comes into play. There's the maintenance of watering, cleaning up falling needles and disposal; that's where that handy friend is invited over for holiday drinks.
A small tree (real or artificial) can have bigger presence when elevated on a table or stand.
Everlasting love
An artificial tree offers a holiday convenience at this hectic time of year and can be displayed for much longer throughout the season (some people like to leave it up for a month or two). Artificial trees have advantages and disadvantages you should consider before choosing this option.
PROS: Your investment can last for many years, averaging $20 to $40 per year over 10 years. They are a great option for families that like to have two trees in the house (the artificial one allows you a second, less expensive, low-maintenance option that you can decorate in a new theme every year). Most everlastings are fire retardant, do not drop needles, are easy to erect and need no maintenance once decorated. Many come pre-lit with a variety of LED light options that allow you to change the colours, and offer blinking and fade options depending on the mood you want to achieve.
CONS: Artificial trees are mainly made of synthetics that are not great for the environment. They take up storage space year round and limit your options of tree style from year to year. They also lack that real tree scent; but you can make up for this by using an essential oil diffuser and a pine or other evergreen essential oil for a genuine Christmas tree scent that lasts through the season without fading.
TIP: Put the diffuser near the front door to greet guests with the scents of the season, and then another diffuser near the artificial tree.
The CANVAS Pre-Lit Harrison 7.5 feet Noble Fir Tree has 900 clear lights and 4250 branch tips to display lots of ornaments. $499, CanadianTire.ca
Designer tips for your tree
- Height
Your tree should reach six inches from the ceiling. If opting for something shorter, then the tree should be two-thirds of the height of the room. Considering a small (five feet or shorter) tree? Place it on a short table or box to elevate it and make it give it more presence.
- Lights and ornaments
How much is too much - or too little? Follow these guidelines. Lights: For each foot of height, use around 100 lights. Ornaments: You need 25 to 50 ornaments per foot. The trend is to find either very large opaque coloured lights for a classic vintage 1960s look or tiny micro lights in warm white for a starry sky sparkly effect.
- The "Trim" Tree
For a visually airier, lighter more whimsical tree (à la Charlie Brown), use a small hacksaw to trim every second row of branches off a real tree. The sparser effect shows off your the ornaments as they dangle with space around them. Use the tree cuttings to make wreaths and garlands (and spread the fresh scent elsewhere in the house).
Do you have a decor dilemma or want to give feedback? You can contact Karl Lohnes on Facebook or Instagram at Karl Lohnes Designer, or via email at klohnesdecor@sympatico.ca( mailto:klohnesdecor@sympatico.ca ).
Karl has worked as a home decor expert and product designer for 25 years. He appears Thursdays during the 8 a.m. hour on Global News Morning Montreal.
Related
Karl Lohnes: Updating your holiday decor with a few new colours( https://montrealgazette.com/life/homes/karl-lohnes-updating-your-holiday-decor-with-a-few-new-colours )
One Montreal man's 100,000-bulb campaign to create the best Christmas display( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/one-montreal-mans-100000-bulb-campaign-to-create-the-best-christmas-display )
Early holiday decor adds to the magic of the Christmas season( https://montrealgazette.com/life/homes/early-holiday-decor-adds-to-the-magic-of-the-christmas-season )

