Like the conservative New Year's Eve celebrator who wanted to purchase a noisemaker that wasn't too loud, headline writers were recently faced with a challenge: how to deal with a precipitous (''steep,'' not precipitate, ''abrupt, rash, headlong'') decline in the stock market without encouraging a panic. (Come to think of it, precipitate would be accurate, too, if you wanted to describe the behavior of the professional investors rather than the graph showing stock movement. Celebrator is New York Times style for celebrant.)
The onomatopoeic crash was a word that Wall Street Journal editorialists were unafraid to use, but the front page of that publication chose a verb less evocative of 1929: ''Stocks Plummet 7 Percent.'' (That verb was formed in this century from the noun plummet, a weight used to sound, or fathom, the depth of water; in Shakespeare's ''Tempest,'' Prospero says, ''Deeper than did ever plummet sound/I'll drown my book,'' a sentiment quoted by excessively modest authors.)
''Massive Sell-Off'' was the choice of USA Today. The adjective massive lent urgency to the stock-market term sell-off, a noun first reported in 1937 by the Baltimore Sun and still specialized enough to retain its hyphen in most citations. The New York Times disagrees; the bank, or infixed subhead, of its Hong Kong article read, ''The Hang Seng sets the scene for a global selloff,'' unhyphenated. USA Today also used the noun rout (military origin) and the verb dived (from swimming, with that past tense preferred to dove). Its columnist, Walter Shapiro, later used a less-alarmist word picture: ''Watching the Dow snow-plow down the mountain.''
Plunge (from a 1380 use about baptism by immersion) got a nice play in the Baltimore Sun (but if I first reported the use of sell-off, I'd stick with it proudly). In Newsweek, C. K. Binswanger and Lucy Howard noted the panic prevention in newspapers: drop (International Herald Tribune), tailspin (Jiji Press Ticker of Tokyo), tumble (Milwaukee Journal Sentinel) and tremble (Montreal Gazette).
In the synonymy of the bears, decline, sag, sink and slump are mildest; drop, more sudden; tumble, not shocking; dive and plunge, precipitous; plummet, precipitate; sell-off, technical; correction, interpretive or euphemistic; free fall, alarming; collapse, sudden and steep, and crash, better lock that window.
Television journalists, who could immediately affect the market with their demeanor, were careful; NBC called it ''the Big Drop'' and Fox chose ''Blue Monday.''
Now we are into the color of the day. Oct. 19, 1987, was called Black Monday on the analogy of Black Thursday of Oct. 24, 1929, and Black Tuesday of Oct. 29, 1929. These were antedated by Black Friday of Sept. 24, 1869, when Jay Gould drove brokers into bankruptcy with his attempted corner of the gold market. It all began with Blue Monday in the Middle Ages, supposedly the first Monday before Lent, when revelers felt hung over from pre-Lenten flings; later, it became the day to feel depressed about returning to work after a weekend. Several commentators dubbed last month's sell-off (in retrospect, that seems the best word, but who knew at the time?) to have happened on a less-than-calamitous day: Gray Monday.
I confess to having used the euphemistic correction two months before October's financial fibrillation. My technical analysis went, ''You're going to see a correction one of these days that will curl your hair.'' This was an obscure allusion to a figure of speech that sent a shiver through the financial markets 40 years ago. In a 1957 news conference (in those days called a press conference), Eisenhower's Treasury Secretary, a former steel man named George Magoffin Humphrey, was asked if he saw any hope of cutting defense spending in the coming years. He replied that such spending was ''a terrific tax take we are taking out of this country,'' and that if we did not reduce defense expenditures, ''over a long period of time, I will predict that you will have a depression that will curl your hair.''
I enjoy making arcane allusions like that; a few in the codger crowd catch them. One such is Herbert Stein, who once noted how a fellow economist, Sol Fabricant, described a period of less-than-robust expansion by calling it a growth recession. Stein satirized this at the time with an imaginary conversation:
Stein: That's a handsome dog you have there, Sol.
Fabricant: That's not a dog. It's a horse.
Stein: But Sol, it's so small.
Fabricant: It's a growth horse.
Since that time, just as brokers have eschewed the word crash, economists have avoided the word recession, especially those in which hair is curled to depression levels. In 1982, I asked a couple of economists how they would define depression. Alan Greenspan said, ''A depression is either a 12 percent unemployment rate for nine months or more, or a 15 percent unemployment rate for three to nine months.'' Prof. Alfred Kahn of Cornell defined it as unemployment above 10 percent with two quarters of consecutive decline in real G.N.P.
When serving in the Carter Administration, Kahn was chastised for even using the word depression in public. He vowed to White House spinmeisters that whenever he had to refer to such a calamity, he would substitute the word banana.
I still think the market is due for a hair-curler one day, but not so severe as to lead to anything like the Great Banana.
WATER, WATER EVERYWHERE
''As I travel around the country,'' said Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, ''people ask me, 'What's in the water in Tennessee these days, with so many Presidential contenders?''' These include Vice President Al Gore for the Democrats and Senator Fred Thompson and the former Tennessee Governor Lamar Alexander for the Republicans.
That led to the metaphor of the month from the former Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker, a Tennessean who now lobbies in Washington: ''If Al Gore runs for President,'' Baker said, ''and Lamar Alexander and Fred Thompson run for President, we'll pump so much money out of Tennessee that the surface will subside and the Mississippi River will run in and flood us all.''

