Although the brutal cold spell( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/baby-its-cold-outside ) that lasted almost two weeks finally broke on Monday, the snowfall that followed caused long delays for evening train commuters. The Réseau de transport métropolitain announced delays of up to 30 minutes for departures on the Vaudreuil-Hudson, Saint-Jérôme and Candiac lines, including two cancellations on the Candiac line because of track switches clogged with snow. Less severe delays were announced for the Deux-Montagnes, Mont-Saint-Hilaire and Mascouche lines.
Delayed are the 4:20, 4:40 and 5 p.m. departures toward Vaudreuil-Hudson, the 4:55 p.m. departure from Vaudreuil to Montreal, the 3:50, 4:05 and 4:35 p.m. departures toward Saint-Jérôme, the 3:45 p.m. departure from Saint-Jérôme toward Montreal, and the 3:35, 4:15 and 4:45 p.m. departures toward Candiac. The 3:55, 5:15 and 5:55 p.m. departures for Candiac were cancelled.
Snow clearing begins Monday night
On Monday night, the city of Montreal will begin clearing away the snow that has fallen during the last week. About 10 centimetres of snow fell throughout the day on Monday with another two to four centimetres expected Monday night.
The city received several small accumulations of snow since the last clearing operation was completed on New Year's Eve. A total of 18.4 centimetres had fallen as of Sunday.
"We need the cooperation of citizens and want people to respect the No Parking signs," said Jean-François Parenteau, the executive committee member in charge of snow removal.
Parenteau said he hopes the snow-removal operation will be finished by Thursday night.
During the weekend, several boroughs had lots of snow on the streets, and while sidewalk plows were out, many streets remained snow-covered. The centralized snow-clearing policy means the city decides when plowing and removal operations take place.
You can keep track of the city's snow-removal operation on itsInfo-Neige website( https://infoneige.ca/ ) (infoneige.ca) or on its mobile application.
Better weather to come
Mother Nature is offering up something a bit more appealing later this week.
A low pressure system and a warm front from Hudson Bay is expected to bring rain showers on Thursday with a forecast high of between 5 and 10 C. The record for Jan. 11, registered in both 1975 and 1980, is 9.4 C, according to Jean-Philippe Bégin, a meteorologist with Environment Canada.
Montreal could see freezing rain or mixed precipitation on Wednesday before temperatures climb on Thursday, Bégin said.
The mild weather will probably not lead to flooding because the thaw and the rain will not last long, Bégin predicted. The snow on the ground will also absorb some of the rain, he said. Temperatures will fall throughout the day on Friday with colder weather returning for the weekend. Environment Canada is forecasting a high of -11 C on Saturday and Sunday.
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

