RIVIÈRE DU LOUP - After a summer in which heat waves rolled across Quebec, killing dozens of seniors, Jean-François Lisée says it's time for the government to take action.
The Parti Québécois leader pledged Wednesday to have air-conditioning in all provincially run elder care centres by next summer. He says the measure will save lives and would cost the government about $100 million.
"From the moment we form a government, we're calling the hospitals and the elder care centres and telling them, 'Call the contractors, start making plans'," said Lisée, while visiting a senior's club in Rimouski. "Get the work started. We think it'll cost less than $100 million but that's what we're putting aside."
Study after study suggests sweltering summers like the one Quebecers just experienced will only get worse as the effects of global warming worsen.
Physicians say seniors are one of the most at risk groups during heat waves. But most of the deaths last summer were concentrated in Montreal apartments and not senior centres.
Even so, Lisée says giving seniors a comfortable place to live should be the central plank of any electoral platform.
"Our society isn't adapting to an aging population ... elders dying during a heat wave, what kind of society allows that," said Harold Lebel, the PQ's candidate in Rimouski. "We talk a lot about what it means to die in dignity but what about living in dignity?"
On Tuesday, the PQ launched a series of attack ads that target the Liberals management of elder care centres. One involves a sort of call and response joke that gets booed by a comedy club audience:
"What does an elder care resident say after his bath? See you next week!"
A government evaluation of all Quebec's elder care centres found that one in four were either in "bad" or "very bad" condition.
The PQ wants to invest an extra $200 million to renovate the centres and improve the ratio of nurses and specialists to patients. That would cost $500 million over four years and Lisée said the PQ would pump $10 million into the centres as of this fall. With the $100 million for air conditioning, that comes to $800 million.
The Coalition Avenir Québec has promised to invest $1 billion to create a network of "more humane" senior homes during its first mandate. The government would build 30 and replace all existing senior centres by the year 2038.
At every stop during his campaign, Lisée has told seniors that it will take a generation for the CAQ's plan to take effect.
"Our seniors need their homes now, not in 20 years," Lisée said.
Also on Wednesday, the PQ leader pledged to add 900,000 hours of home care each year - a 30 per cent increase over current levels.
Last year, a report tabled at the National Assembly found that Liberal budget cuts reduced the amount of home care by one per cent between 2015 and 2016. The report suggests that about 18 per cent of elders need home care but fewer than half actually have access to it.
Throughout the 14-day campaign, Lisée has promised to freeze a $2 billion pay raise to Quebec's doctors and invest the money in home care instead.
It's unclear if that would be possible given that the contract guaranteeing that pay raise has already been signed.
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/titocurtis( http://twitter.com/titocurtis )
Related
Read more of our 2018 Quebec election coverage right here( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-elections )
Can't get enough of Quebec politics? Join our Facebook group( https://www.facebook.com/groups/TheQuebecBureau/ )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

