After a nasty winter storm dumped 36 centimetres of snow on the Montreal region, snow removal crews were to be back at work on Sunday night cleaning up the mess.
The city said it could take more than five days before all streets and sidewalks are cleared, because in some boroughs, crews had not yet finished removing snow from the previous storm. It is the fourth snow removal operation this winter.
City officials reminded citizens to stay far away from snow removal trucks and other vehicles used in the operation, which will see snow removed from 4,100 kilometres of streets and 6,550 kilometres of sidewalks.
"In order for the snow removal operation to be done safely, we are asking people to be careful around snow removal vehicles," said Jean-François Parenteau, the executive committee member in charge of snow removal.
He also asked motorists to respect the No Parking signs, so fewer cars have to be towed away, which slows down snow removal operations.
You can keep track of snow removal operations on the city's website( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/snowremoval/avancement ) or mobile application.
The Montreal region received even more snow than expected on Saturday - 36 centimetres of snow at Trudeau airport - and travel was difficult over the weekend because of snowy and slippery roads. Visibility was reduced throughout Saturday morning, when snow fell at a rate of four to six centimetres an hour, according to meteorologist Julie Deshaies.
Good Samaritans try to push a car out of a snowbank on Queen Mary Rd. near Circle Rd. on Saturday, Jan. 13, 2018.
People try to get car out of a snowbank on the service road alongside Highway 40 near Highway 13 on Jan. 13, 2018.
Four-year-old Naima Biunno makes it safely across Queen Mary Rd., behind her mother, Maro Adjemian, as they undertake some cross-country skiing around their neighbourhood on Saturday, Jan. 13, 2018. While Montreal-area residents were digging out cars and shovelling driveways over the weekend, residents in some parts of the province were forced from their homes after rivers began overflowing following heavy rain and a thaw at the end of last week. In Beauport, near Quebec City, about 42 millimetres of rain had fallen, causing the Montmorency River to overflow.
People near Sherbrooke, Quebec City and in Bécancour reported flooding in their basements and several people had to be rescued by firefighters using boats.
With the heavy snow fall across Quebec, the Montreal Children's Hospital put out a warning( http://montrealgazette.com/news/how-to-avoid-carbon-monoxide-poisoning-after-a-heavy-snowfall ) reminding motorists to make sure their exhaust pipes are not blocked while they are clearing snow from their vehicles.
Blocked exhaust pipes can pull carbon monoxide back into the car, causing poisoning in children who might be in the car while it's idling.
Hospital officials noted that no children have died of carbon monoxide this season. Nonetheless, administrators want parents to be aware of their list of safety tips. First, never leave a child alone in an idling car. Remove the snow from your car prior to starting the engine and ensure that the exhaust pipe is not blocked.
Cars should not be left running inside the garage even if the garage door is open. Signs of carbon monoxide poisoning include headaches, dizziness, nausea, vomiting and fatigue. More serious exposure can result in fainting, convulsions, coma and even death.
For more information, go to http://www.thechildren.com/health-info/conditions-and-illnesses/preventing-carbon-monoxide-co-poisoning-winter( http://www.thechildren.com/health-info/conditions-and-illnesses/preventing-carbon-monoxide-co-poisoning-winter ).
kwilton@postmedia.com( mailto:kwilton@postmedia.com )
Related
Safety first in stormy weather: Tips for winter warriors( http://montrealgazette.com/news/safety-first-in-stormy-weather-tips-for-winter-warriors )
Gallery: Wild weather grips Montreal( http://montrealgazette.com/gallery/gallery-wild-weather-grips-montreal )
Transport Quebec advisory on eastbound Highway 20 during heavy snowfall in Montreal on Saturday, Jan. 13, 2018.
A snowplow makes its way on Decarie Blvd. near Queen Mary Rd. on Saturday, Jan. 13, 2018.
A snowplow works hard at clearing southbound Highway 13 on Saturday, Jan. 13, 2018.
CREDIT: Katherine Wilton, Montreal Gazette

