Sunday's Grey Cup showdown features a pair of teams that are very familiar with the Canadian Football League's marquee event.
Montreal is making its fifth appearance in the last seven championship games. The Alouettes, however, have only one title to show for those appearances - a 2002 triumph over Edmonton.
British Columbia will play in its third Grey Cup in the last seven. The Lions' last title came in 2000 with a victory over Montreal.
Heading into the game, history appears to be on British Columbia's side.
B.C. has won eight of nine games against Montreal since 2002. The Western champion Lions pounded the Als, who beat Toronto in the East final, both times they met this season - 48-13 in Montreal on Sept. 1 and 36-20 in Vancouver on Sept. 16.
Will the trend continue on Sunday?
Grey Cup week always brings an opportunity to reflect on the state of the game. This year is no different. Among the lingering issues is the fact that the contract of commissioner Tom Wright expires at the end of year. A successor has not been named.
On Tuesday, the Globe's Grey Cup team of Stephen Brunt, Allan Maki and David Naylor took an in-depth look at a number of issues surrounding the league .
Stephen Brunt was online today and discussed both Sunday's match-up and the state of the league.
Join the Conversation at that time or submit a question or comment in advance. Your questions and Mr. Brunt's answers will appear at the bottom of this page when the discussion begins.
Sasha Nagy, globeandmail.com writes: Hi Stephen: Thanks for taking some time during a busy Grey Cup week to answer questions from Globe readers. There's nothing like Grey Cup weekend to draw prodigal fans of the CFL back into the fold. How important do you feel the Grey Cup is to Canada's national identity? Does the game transcend sport?
Stephen Brunt: Hi Sasha. It's a bit of a cliche, but I do think the Grey Cup ties in to national identity. Not for everyone in Canada, and not everywhere - this is a great, big diverse country we live in. Even an Olympic hockey gold medal doesn't speak to somebody out there. But the great thing about the Grey Cup is that it is absolutely, organically, uniquely ours. The game was invented here. The league is completely based here. And in a lot of ways, the spirit of the event is far more grassroots than, say, the Stanley Cup Finals. The closest thing, really, is the Brier. You don't have to be a hard core football fan to enjoy the ritual of watching the game on Grey Cup Sunday. And I would point you to Dave Naylor's story today in the sports section, and on Globesports.com, about how Canadian football has become a point of entry into North American sports for immigrant communities. The Canadian quotient of the two teams playing on Sunday is in a lot of ways more representative of this country in all its hues than are the Canadians playing on NHL teams.
Andrew D from Canada writes: Good day, Mr. Brunt. Three quick questions: 1) Do you feel the negativity regarding the dip in attendance and television viewership is overdone? Sure, it's down slightly from last year, but having seen the attendance and television numbers from even 7 years ago it seems the league has made major strides in getting back into the public consciouness. 2) Can you remember the last time a blowout was expected in the Grey Cup? I personally can't recall the last time one team was thought to be so superior to the other. 3) Where do you think Adriano Belli will end up next year? As an Argonaut fan, I think he'd be invaluable in shoring up the run defence.
Stephen Brunt: Hi Andrew. 1) Actually, the television numbers are pretty strong this year, and in general, attendance across the league if fine. That crowd of 50,000 last week for the Western Final in Vancouver was particularly impressive. The challenge for the league has always been how to translate whatever its numbers are into enough revenue to pay the bills, and make a bit of a profit. They're not quite there yet. 2) Two years ago, a lot of people including me thought that the Lions were going to blow out the Toronto Argonauts, who had upset Montreal in the Eastern Final. We were all wrong, and maybe we're wrong to assume an easy B.C. win on Sunday. 3) Not sure about where Belli will wind up. He's a terrific player, but his lack of discipline on the field really hurt the team when he played for Hamilton this season. It will be a real challenge for any coach, trying to keep all of that emotion focused in the right place.
Steve K from Canada writes: Hi Stephen: I admire your writings and comments. Maybe I'm getting old, but ... is there any chance that the CFL season could be moved a month earlier? Like alot of people, I love summer games but find the minus 10-20 Celcius November games to be a bit of a drag sometimes. Why do even CFL 'hotspots' (no pun intended) like Edmonton, Winnipeg, Regina appear to have hundreds/thousands of no-shows on Grey Cup day? Winnipeg seems to be having trouble selling all the Cup tickets this year. I think it's because a lot of people would, truthfully, prefer to sit in a warm home take in the game on tv. Also, with a warmer Cup game the action would be a bit more accomplished vs. muffed passes/punts/fumbles etc. (e.g. Doug Flutie's criticism during his CFL days) Ok, maybe I'm being a suck ... but I don't want every Cup game to be in an indoor stadium.
Stephen Brunt: Hi Steve. Thanks for the kind words.
They did move the schedule back a week, to try and avoid playing Grey Cup games in howling prairie blizzards (though, irony of ironies, the last time the Grey Cup was really affected by winter weather, it was held in the league's most southerly outpost, Hamilton. That game, despite the snowstorm, was a barn-burner.). I think there a couple of business reasons why they won't move it any earlier. Start in the middle of June, and there would be conflicts with the end of the National Hockey League playoffs, both in terms of audience and media interest. Hold the playoffs any earlier in the fall, and they move a little too close to the World Series. Plus, I think that there's a feeling that a lot of people really don't tune in to the CFL until Labour Day. The way the schedule is now, the CFL gets plenty of attention for the stretch drive and the playoffs. And they're going to luck out on the weather again this year - Sunday is supposed to be clear and not too cold, though that's a lot easier to say if you know you're going to be watching from a warm press box.
John Ng from Ottawa writes: Hi Stephen. Enjoy your work. Any truth to the rumour that Alouettes owner Robert Wetenhall is spearheading another attempt at U.S. expansion, this time targeting a number of northern-border sites like Rochester, N.Y. and Portland, Or? And who will be the new, de facto gatekeeper of the league, now that Hugh Campbell has left his saddle? Thanks.
Stephen Brunt: Hi John. Bob Wettenhall does indeed believe that the CFL ought to look into U.S. expansion again, focusing on border cities, rather than heading farther south - the way they tried it the first time around. Suffice it to say that not many of the other owners and governors agree with him. But if the league is going to grow beyond eight teams, which is probably necessary to ensure its survival long-term, it might be tough to find places in Canada where there's the right ownership and the right stadium in place. Tom Wright suggested today in his farewell press conference that he thinks they'll be in Halifax after 2010, and that they still would like to get back into Ottawa. Both of those are problematic for different reasons, and if the league found itself in the same kind of financial peril it was in ten years ago, I wouldn't be shocked if more owners might be willing to consider moving into the U.S. As for the next Hugh Campbell, I don't know who could fill that role now. He was a unique combination of things - a football guy who could wield power as though he owned the community franchise in Edmonton. The dominant figures in the league now are the ones with the deepest pockets - David Braley, Wettenhall, Bob Young, and the Toronto owners Howard Sokolowski and David Cynamon - but none of them played the game.
al wonders from Canada writes: Watching the Grey Cup game is a tradition that I fear is fading badly in Canada. My son works in a major sports bar and last Sunday he tells me that the CFL finals were only on the smallest TV located in a corner with the sound turned off. Also I don't know anyone who is going to a Grey Cup event. I hope it is not like that in the rest of Canada because for me when I was younger it was always a great event. I think it is dying because it is not really a Canadian event. Wouldn't it be better if only Canadian citizens were allowed to play and more cities were capable of putting a team together. Do you think the CFL might attract more fans if the Maritime provinces could be represented and perhaps Northwestern Ontario? I think more and more Canadians see the CFL as place for Americans who can't make it in the NFL and as such it will never generate as much excitement as it should.
Stephen Brunt: Thanks for the question Al. There have been Americans playing in the CFL for more than a half century now. We just mourned the passing of one of the greatest of them - Jackie Parker. If you ask any CFL fan of a certain vintage to name their favourite players, you can bet that many if not most of them would be Americans who we embraced as our own heroes. So I don't think the nationality of the athletes is really an issue. But I know what you're saying about the Grey Cup not being the universal attraction that it seemed to be years ago. I think that's more a reflection of our fragmenting world than anything else. There are so many more entertainment and sports options. You can watch any game from anywhere in any league at any time. I think that works against building home town/home country allegiances. I'd argue that isn't what it once was, either. It still draws a big number, but the days of families huddling around the tv on Saturday night are over. It will be interesting to see what my kids - raised in Hamilton, but with a completely different set of experiences than my own - decide they care about as they move on in adulthood. I know they don't feel nearly as strongly about the Ticats, the Blue Jays, and (no, not the Leafs) the Detroit Red Wings - or any team, for that matter - as I did growing up.
Steve K from Canada writes: Hi Stephen. What is your opinion on the current overtime rules for CFL games? Personally, I think having what amounts to a 'football shootout' is silly ... I wish the CFL would revert back to the old rules ... I might be the only one but I thought the ending to last year's Grey Cup game would've seemed more legitimate if the teams had continued playing using regulation-time rules.
Stephen Brunt: It's a tricky question, that the CFL, the NFL, and U.S. college football have all struggled with. I don't think there's a perfect solution. The shootout format was supposed to be better than the first-team-to-score wins format. it made sure that both teams touched the ball in overtime, and increased the chances of the game being won on a touchdown rather than on a long field goal. It can feel a bit gimmicky, though, like shootouts deciding the World Cup. That said, I thought that the entertainment value from last year's Grey Cup finish outweighed any uneasiness I might have about the format.
John Rowell from Nelson, B.C. writes: Hi Stephen: I don't know much about Montreal's quarterback and his back up. How do they rate compared to the Lions' Dickerson and Pierce?
Stephen Brunt: Anthony Calvillo, at his best, is an elite CFL quarterback, and has been for most of the last decade. But this year, he hasn't looked like himself. He's had trouble with his passing accuracy at times, and looked like a guy who might be getting old in a hurry. That said, he played very well against the Argos in the Eastern Final last week. Dickenson, when he was healthy, was the class of the league this year, and Pierce is very capable if he has to step in. If the Als are forced to use either of their back up quarterbacks - Nealon Greene and Marcus Brady - they'll be in big trouble.
Sasha Nagy writes: Stephen: What do you think of Ricky Williams' foray into the CFL? What was gained by the experience for the league and the Argos?
Stephen Brunt: Well, what was it Pinball Clemons said? That it was a win for the franchise, but "an unorthodox win?" Ricky was certainly a fascinating personality, but in the end, I don't think he sold any tickets (and I was one of the people who was sure that he would). On the field, we'll never know what he really could have done, because after he came back from his injuries, the Argos refused to consistently put the ball in his hands. A lot of the hardcore CFL loyalists are using Williams' relative lack of success as proof of the league's quality. Well, maybe - but just once, I would have liked to seen him touch the ball 20 or 25 times in a game.
Sasha Nagy writes: In reading some of the early posts on your Grey Cup blog I was impressed by the experience the Globe team of reporters (yourself, Allan Maki and David Naylor) brings to covering the CFL's signature game. As a CFL fan and kid growing up in Ottawa, no memory is greater to me than Clements to Gabriel for the 1976 Grey Cup win at Exhibition Stadium over the Saskatchewan Roughriders. Do you have a favourite finish from one of the Grey Cup games you've covered?
Stephen Brunt: Even though my guys lost (though we're always impartial in the press box), it would have to be the finish of the classic 1989 game between Saskatchewan and Hamilton. It wasn't just Dave Ridgway's last play field goal to win it, but everything that led up to that point, including Tony Champion's catch, one of the very best I've ever seen. And who could really begrudge a win for the greatest fans in the league? They sure deserved it after what Gabriel did to them in 76 - not to mention what Ian Sunter did to them in 72.
Sasha Nagy: Stephen, thanks for taking the time to answer questions. You've got a busy day ahead of you. I know that Grey Cup week is nothing by work, work, work for the journalists covering the big game. I'll let you save your official prediction for the pages of Globe. But for now, can you tell us who will be the key player for each team on Sunday? And, if you have any other closing thoughts, we'd love to hear them.
Stephen Brunt: Thanks Sasha. It's been fun. Though we always focus on the quarterbacks, I think both running backs in this game - Robert Edwards for Montreal and Joe Smith for B.C. - are going to be key players. To have any chance, the Als need Edwards to do what he did against the Argos last week, not only chewing up yards and clock, but allowing Calvillo to use a lot of play action in the passing game. And B.C. will need to establish a running game to keep the Montreal defence honest - otherwise, they'll be blitzing Dave Dickenson on nearly every play.
Hope everyone enjoys the game.

