Billie Eilish is everywhere.
Since the release of her 2016 debut single Ocean Eyes, the 17-year-old pop prodigy has collected 26 million followers on Instagram, accumulated 48 million monthly listeners on Spotify, and topped the charts in 15 countries. Her music videos for her hits Bad Guy, Bellyache, Lovely and When the Party's Over have amassed 200 million views - each.
In the next few months, she is expected to perform nearly 40 concerts to promote her album When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?, which sold 313,000 units in its first week.
But on Wednesday night, Eilish was in Laval, performing to 9,500 fans at Place Bell. To better understand the hype surrounding the pop singer's meteoric rise to fame, the Montreal Gazette spoke to Eilish's legion of followers who lined up outside the venue.
Singer/songwriter Billie Eilish played at Place Bell in Laval June 12, 2019. Photo credit: Patrick Beaudry / evenko
Who is Billie Eilish?
"Billie Eilish is my religion," said 19-year-old Emma Belmont, decked out in baggy electric-blue clothes designed to emulate the singer's anti-pop star aesthetic. "I would do anything for her."
Billie Eilish is different things to different people. To longtime fan Jana Bedjaoui, she's "a role model." To Shanaya Smith - who only discovered Eilish's music this year - she's "a girl everyone can relate to." According to the New York Times, Eilish is "the future of pop."
Regardless of what she is labelled as, one things is certain; there is no definitive way to classify this Los Angeles native who, through a short SoundCloud upload in 2015, was catapulted to stardom almost overnight.
Singer/songwriter Billie Eilish played at Place Bell in Laval June 12, 2019. Photo credit: Patrick Beaudry / evenko
What makes Eilish different?
Eilish's singularity is perhaps most evident in her music videos, which contain imagery that can be considered downright haunting.
Spiders crawl across her face in the video for You Should See Me in a Crown and, in Bury a Friend, she is stabbed repeatedly amid flickering lights. Also, in When the Party's Over, jet-black goo oozes out of her eye sockets as she laments how "nothing is better sometimes." This is a far cry from the visuals of traditional pop stars like Selena Gomez and Taylor Swift.
"Most artists make an effort to look good in their music videos," says Patricia Balla. "But Billie is authentic, and that's why she's revolutionizing pop music."
Singer/songwriter Billie Eilish played at Place Bell in Laval June 12, 2019. Photo credit: Patrick Beaudry / evenko
What genre is her music?
Eilish's music falls in a category recently paved by starlets like Lorde and Lana Del Rey - traditional pop tinged with melancholy. While many of her songs are catchy and upbeat, in interviews and live performances, her downcast eyes and bored facial expressions hint at some greater sorrow lying below the surface of the infectious gloss. For some fans, this makes the music all the more relatable.
"Billie is one of the only artists that knows what I'm feeling before I do," said Julia Prud'homme, one of the first fans to make it through the doors of Place Bell.
To reflect the angst-ridden lyrical content, Eilish's songs are riddled with eerie sound effects, manipulated pitch, and unstable beats. On Bury a Friend, she samples the sounds of breaking glass, an oven timer, and the drill she recorded during a visit to the dentist. Meanwhile, heavy rain and police sirens enhance the themes of depression and mental health present on the soft ballad Before I Go.
Singer/songwriter Billie Eilish played at Place Bell in Laval June 12, 2019. Photo credit: Patrick Beaudry / evenko
What tracks would fans recommend?
With an EP and LP under her belt, there are no shortage of songs to choose from. Still, at Place Bell, most fans seemed to agree that there is one song that best embodies the star's style and artistry - Bury a Friend. An ode to sleep paralysis, the track finds Eilish taking on the perspective of the monster under her bed. Eilish herself has said that this is the track that inspired the themes of her debut album.
"Bury a Friend is creepy, but it's also captivating," said 22-year-old Cassandra Lee. "It's the song that got me hooked."
Many fans also pointed to Bad Guy, the album-opener where Eilish playfully announces that she's the type to "make your momma sad" and "make your girlfriend mad."
"Bad Guy tells you everything you need to know about Billie Eilish," said 17-year-old Stéphanie Houde, while preparing to enter the venue for what she deemed would surely be "the best night of my life."
dsucar@postmedia.com( mailto:dsucar@postmedia.com )
Related
Billie Eilish seeking 'flood therapy' to overcome fear of water( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/celebrity/billie-elish-seeking-flood-therapy-to-overcome-fear-of-water/wcm/77afc3fe-5954-4f1b-8618-81099350977e )
'DON'T GRAB MY BOOBS': Billie Eilish says she was groped by fan at meet and greet( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/dont-grab-my-boobs-billie-eilish-says-she-was-groped-by-fan-at-meet-and-greet/wcm/d6919404-a8e0-42e6-b60c-5b19002b7a14 )
Place Bell set to rock Laval with hockey, music and more( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/place-bell-set-to-rock-laval-with-hockey-music-and-more )
Improvements made to Place Bell after mishaps during Killers concert( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/improvements-made-to-place-bell-after-mishaps-during-killers-concert )

