Catch up on all the big stories that happened this week in Montreal.
Quebec's week-long heat wave contributed to 54 deaths( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-warning-storm-watch-dropped-for-montreal-area-as-heat-wave-ends )
A spokesperson for Santé Montréal confirmed that, as of Friday morning, 28 deaths in the city may have been related to the extreme heat. Dr. David Kaiser, a specialist with the public health department, explained that physicians and first responders who declare deaths look for one of two things when determining whether they're potentially heat-related. The first indicator would be someone presenting symptoms of heat stroke before death or an elevated body temperature. Deaths of those types, however, are less common, he said, counting for only one or two of the 28 deaths over the last week. The majority of deaths, Kaiser said, have been cases of someone dying of an underlying conditions, such as diabetes, within a hot environment at home. None of the 28 deaths have occurred in hospitals or long-term care facilities, he specified.
Environment Canada lifted its week-old heat warning for the Montreal area early Friday. The last time Montreal saw a seven-day heat wave with temperatures above 30 C was in 1973, according to meteorologist Alexandre Parent. He said extreme weather like this has a tendency to occur every 20 years. However, the weather station at McGill University's downtown campus has never picked up more than five consecutive days of weather over 33 C in its 147 years of operation, making this heat wave a first. The cumulative effect of the prolonged heat, during which humidex levels reached up to 40 C, may still impact residents, explained Stefan Overhoff, a spokesperson for Urgences-Santé. Throughout the last week, the number of calls to emergency services jumped by about 30 per cent, Overhoff said, from 1,000 calls a day to anywhere between 1,200 to 1,350 interventions.
Merchants at Jean-Talon Market decried a plan to replace part of a parking lot with an outdoor seating area( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/jean-talon-merchants-oppose-plan-to-build-public-square-in-parking-lot )
The city announced a plan last month to permanently close Shamrock Ave. to cars and make it a place for people to walk and sit, with several seating areas, a picnic area and newly planted trees and plants. Construction on the project began last month and is expected to be completed by the end of the year. However, merchants are miffed that the pedestrianization of Shamrock will result in a new public sitting area near the market's Casgrain Ave. entrance. Lino Birri, whose stall is right near the planned square, said its construction will necessitate removing about 10 parking spots, some of which he uses regularly for deliveries, and others that are used by his customers. Birri, who employs 50 people at the market and another 100 in his fields around Montreal, said the city should be adding, not removing parking spaces to an area that's already difficult to access by car. Charles Gingras, the manager of Chez Louis, another longtime shop on the market's southern end, said the city has known for years that parking is a problem in the area but has not put in place any meaningful solutions. "For people who want to come and buy a lot of stuff, it's too complicated," Gingras said. Although the city recently built a 50-space indoor lot under the SAQ shop on the western side of the market, it doesn't help those with mobility issues because a promised elevator still has not been built - three years after the parking lot opened.
Montreal International Jazz Festival cancelled the remaining performances of SLAV on Wednesday( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/jazz-fest-cancels-remaining-slav-performances?video_autoplay=true )
Billed as "a theatrical odyssey based on slave songs," the show had been accused of cultural appropriation and insensitivity. Its director, Robert Lepage, and star, Betty Bonifassi, are both white. A swiftly-organized protest on the first night of the run, Tuesday, June 26, set in motion a wave of reactions in the press and online. Social media exploded with debate on the topic. Two shows were cancelled last Friday after Bonifassi fractured her ankle. Two days turned into four, as Monday and Tuesday's performances were subsequently cancelled. But it was L.A. post-soul singer Moses Sumney's decision to pull out of the jazz fest and instead perform an off-festival show at La Sala Rossa, Tuesday night (which turned into two shows after the first one sold out), that may have been the tipping point. Tuesday afternoon, Sumney made public his letter to the jazz fest( http://mosessumney.tumblr.com/post/175516153503/i-recently-decided-to-pull-out-of-the-montreal ) explaining in detail why he would not be performing at the event. On Wednesday morning, an open letter of protest( https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdK2rgBhNjQSQy8LWtu7y9ClVGl_XFsv57A8FNIqZzuPjvHeg/viewform ) against the show was released, bearing over 1,500 signatures.
"Since the beginning of SLAV performances, the festival team has been shaken and strongly affected by all the comments received," the jazz fest said in a statement Wednesday. "We would like to apologize to those who were hurt. It was not our intention at all. For the Montreal International Jazz Festival, inclusion and reconciliation between communities are essential."Lepage said the move was a "direct blow to artistic freedom( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepage-breaks-his-silence-on-jazz-fest-decision-to-muzzle-slav )." Hours after his statement was released, the Parti Québécois threw its support behind Lepage, with leader Jean-François Lisée likening the cancellation to censorship and MNA Maka Kotto describing it as "intellectual terrorism."
Montreal Canadiens defenceman will be out until mid-December after knee surgery( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/canadiens-shea-weber-out-until-mid-december-after-knee-surgery )
The Canadiens announced that Weber had arthroscopic surgery last month to repair a meniscal tear in his right knee and the veteran defenceman's recovery period is expected to be six months. Weber also had surgery in March to repair tendons in his left foot. The knee surgery was performed by Dr. Robert LaPrade, an orthopedic surgeon in Vail, Colo. Said Canadiens general manger Marc Bergevin in the team's news release: "We were very disappointed to learn that this knee injury will extend Shea's recovery period. Unfortunately, this is out of our control and we have to fully trust the medical group in these situations. We are confident that his recovery will go as scheduled and that Shea will return to action as soon as possible." Weber missed one game last season against the Minnesota Wild on Nov. 9 at the Bell Centre because of the knee injury. The other 54 games he missed were because of his foot injury. In the 26 games Weber played, he posted 6-10-16 totals and was minus-8 while averaging a team-high 25:21 of ice time.
Friday marked the five-year anniversary of the Lac-Mégantic tragedy( https://montrealgazette.com/news/lac-megantic-growing-up-after-a-tragedy )
For youth from Lac-Mégantic, where the train derailment and explosion killed 47, grief has been a formative experience. A recent study examined the impact of the fatal train derailment on young people in Lac-Mégantic. Although it draws some stark conclusions, one of its authors says the overall message is a hopeful one. Although 25 per cent of the children surveyed showed symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, the rate among adults was 50 per cent, according to Danielle Maltais, a humanities professor at Université du Québec à Chicoutimi. "These kids are incredibly resilient, and the adults in their lives have done a great job at caring for them in an impossible situation," Maltais said. The study, however, does hint at a link between the tragedy and self-harming behaviour. Some 39 per cent of teenage respondents said they had suicidal thoughts in the last year - roughly twice the provincial average. Twenty-one per cent of high school students seriously considered harming themselves. That's three times higher than the Quebec average. If they didn't lose a parent or a loved one, the youth in Lac-Mégantic lost their town square - a place that contained memories of St-Jean Baptiste celebrations in the park or trips to the ice cream parlour.
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette

