This story was first published on Nov. 30, 2008, in the Montreal Gazette.
"After sixteen years' faithful service as a fire horse, 'Tom,' a well-known horse of the Verdun fire department, is to be rewarded with a pension of easy work for the balance of his life."
The Gazette, Tuesday, Nov. 29, 1921
Tom was about 20 years old, and was showing his age. He - it seems churlish to refer to so well-loved an animal as "it" - was the oldest still in service with the Verdun fire department, and was no longer up to the rigours of hauling fire wagons pell-mell through the city's streets.
But he was not to be condemned to continued if less hectic toil in the streets of Verdun, much less consigned to the knacker's. By a resolution of Verdun city council, Tom was to be "sent to the corporation yard for use in the yard, with instructions to the employees of the yard to see that the horse is handled carefully and not abused, as this horse ... has proven himself a faithful animal."
Fire horses certainly were held in special regard. Raoul Gauthier, who would become fire chief in Montreal two years later, learned one day that a ladder truck from Station 16 had smashed into a tram. He rushed over to the station, at Rachel St. and Parc La Fontaine Ave. He wanted to know not if any of his men had been injured but if any horses had been. The men could be replaced easily enough, but not the horses.
Fire horses were not necessarily of one special breed, but were a breed apart for all that. They somehow had to combine the power of a heavy draught animal like a Clydesdale with speed approaching a racehorse's. Every year, the Montreal department's horse coper was sent to western Canada to see what he could buy.
Once acquired, the horses were carefully trained before being assigned to one station or another. There, they had their own stalls at the rear of the station. There, when an alarm came in, they stepped from their stalls a few feet and waited while their harnesses were quickly lowered from above and snapped into place. The so-called drop or swinging harness, an ingenious device in use in Montreal since the 1880s, did away with the need to keep the horses harnessed at all times.
Once hitched to their wagons, the horses dashed out of the station. One man held the reins while another clanged the bell as they raced through the streets to the fire. Sparks often could be seen where the horses' iron-shod feet struck the stone pavement.
Blankets were kept under the driver's seat, and if it was winter they would be spread over the horses' backs while the men fought the fire. If the blaze promised to take time to extinguish, the horses might be led to shelter at the nearest fire station.
Indeed, in one way the horses came into their own during the winter months. The fire departments of the various municipalities on Montreal Island began to acquire motorized equipment in the early years of the last century, but it could be problematic in winter. Haphazard snow clearing, especially in side streets or during a blizzard, saw to that. Horse-drawn fire wagons, their wheels replaced with runners, had an easier time getting through.
But as snow clearing and motorized fire trucks became more sophisticated, it was clear that fire horses would no longer be needed. Montreal's last were retired in 1936, at a colourful and indeed moving ceremony presided over by Mayor Camillien Houde.
Some horses, like Verdun's Tom, found retirement easy enough. Others faced long hours of work.
One retired horse found itself employed hauling a milk wagon. One day, after the milkman had got down at a Park Ave. address to make a delivery, one of Montreal's new motorized reels went racing by, its bell clanging loudly. That was all the ex-fire horse needed to hear. Even though it had been facing in the wrong direction, it wheeled about and charged after the excitement. The bemused milkman could only stand and watch as horse and milk wagon alike disappeared from view.
On another occasion, a former fire horse, still employed by the city but in the decidedly unglamorous work of pulling a garbage wagon, found itself a short way from a level crossing. A train was approaching, the engineer ringing its bell. The horse's ears perked up as it responded to the familiar sound. It charged - and was killed when it collided with the locomotive.
Read more about Montreal's history here.( http://montrealgazette.com/category/sponsored/mtl-375th )
CREDIT: Patricia Wright

