Carey Price made 35 saves Thursday night, but there was one that stood out.
The score was tied 2-2 and there was 1:47 remaining in regulation time when Jakob Silfverberg had an opening to Price's left on an odd-man rush. Price threw his legs out and stopped the Anaheim sniper with a double-pad stack.
It's not a move you can practise, Price noted when he said: "It's a spur of the moment thing. I don't do it very often, but when I do, I need both pads."
The double-pad stack save was a trademark for Martin Brodeur and Dominik Hasek and Price was asked if he patterned his move after either of those Hall of Famers.
"It's a combo, (but) I think they were smoother than I am."
Carey Price made 35 saves Thursday night at the Bell Centre to help Montreal beat the Ducks 3-2 in overtime.
The save allowed defenceman Jeff Petry to win the game 25 seconds into the 3-on-3 overtime.
"He had a big game and he had a big-league shot there to win it," Price said.
With Shea Weber on the sidelines for at least a week with a lower-body injury, the Canadiens relied heavily on Petry. He led all skaters with 27:25 of ice time, playing a regular shift and seeing time in the power play and the penalty kill.
Rookie Nick Suzuki, who scored his 11th goal of the season on a first-period power play, didn't figure on the scoresheet on the game-winner, but he served as a decoy, pulling a defender away from the goal.
"(Joel Armia) came back and made a good pass to me and allowed me to pretty much skate up the ice two-on-one," Petry said. "I saw Suzuki going down the left side, but the D-man faded to the post and it seemed like he was giving me the shot the whole way so I had to take it there.
"At this point a win's a win," Petry added. "Obviously, we want to play the right way and there's things we need to clean up and do better. But at this point of the year and the situation we're in, we'll take a win any way we can get them."
The win allowed the Canadiens to close some ground on the teams they are chasing for a playoff spot. Montreal finished the night five points behind Florida in the battle for third place in the Atlantic Division. The Panthers, who lost 7-2 at home to Vegas, still enjoy three games in hand.
And the Canadiens are six points behind Philadelphia in the race for the second wild-card spot. The Flyers, who were shut out 5-0 by New Jersey, hold two games in hand.
With injuries and the flu taking their toll. Jake Evans was called up from Laval and made his NHL debut. Evans, who got the call Thursday morning, was stopped on a breakaway on his first shift and played a solid game on a line with Ilya Kovalchuk and Max Domi.
"We were all cheering for him to score on his first NHL shift," Claude Julien said.
Evans has been a centre all his life, but played right wing for the second time in his career. The first time was Wednesday in Laval to make room for Jesperi Kotkaniemi in the middle.
"For a guy who plays centre, he did a good job," Julien said. "He played with speed and he did a good job on the wall. Jake's got some skill. If he struggled, I would have made a change, but he didn't and I kept him with those guys."
The announced attendance was 20.896, but the actual turnout was much lower. There were hundreds of no-shows which could be attributed to the quality of the matchup and/or fears of an impending blizzard.
phickey@postmedia.com( mailto:phickey@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/zababes1( http://Twitter.com/zababes1 )
Related
Petry's overtime snipe helps Canadiens squeak past the Ducks( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/petrys-overtime-snipe-helps-canadiens-squeak-past-the-ducks )
Canadiens Game Day: Shea Weber placed on injured-reserve list( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/canadiens-game-day-shea-weber-placed-on-injured-reserve-list )
Canadiens Notebook: Habs show they haven't quit on playoff drive( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/canadiens-notebook-habs-show-they-havent-quit-on-playoff-drive )

