Okay, so we lost Federer - but we haven't lost our appetites! Rogers Cup is bringing tennis greats including Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Alexander Zverev to Jarry Park from August 2 to 11, 2019( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/tennis/felix-auger-aliassime-gives-fans-a-hometown-favourite-in-rogers-cup ). And when you get hungry between matches, here are eight park-adjacent spots sure to win you over.
Fameux Gyros Elatos
Still one of the city's best-kept secrets, this Greek hole-in-the-wall awaits on the other side of the underpass west of Jarry Park. The chicken souvlaki brochettes are succulent and oreganoed to perfection. But the gyro, oh my, the gyro. Made from scratch with a mix of pork and lamb, it's juicy but not oily, complex, tender and just charred enough. It's great served loose or enveloped in puffy pita and thick, homemade tzatziki. I get it "Elatos style," with yellow mustard and fries IN the sandwich.
550 Jarry St. W.
A close-up look at the pita gyros Elatos plate (with french fries inside the sandwich as served at restaurant Fameux Gyros Elatos.
Sana
The prices at this unassuming Pakistani eatery( http://www.montrealgazette.com/life/Casual+Dining+Sana/6381341/story.html ) are hard to believe, especially when it comes to the grill plates. The "small" - shareable for two - combines a tikka chicken thigh, a minced-lamb brochette, a big piece of fish and a cubed beef kebab, all topped with fresh red onion and cilantro, and all for under $20. Vegetarians will find bliss in the many veggie curries, including the scrumptious mix of spinach, broccoli and mustard greens (different from the saag) - and don't forget a side of puffy coriander naan.
655 Jarry St. W.
Café Oui Mais Non
This fun and eclectic coffee shop just off Jarry Park's northeastern corner will refresh you with one of the most caramelly, mellow cold brew coffees in town - delicious just like that, black on ice. The charming interior is full of mismatched furniture, quirky décor (don't mind the Christmas tree) and neighbourhood digital nomads. It is an antidote to the bon chic bon genre tennis vibe, the perfect spot to enjoy a sultry grilled cheese with bacon or the vegan sandwich du jour.
72 Jarry St. E.
Miss Villeray
No-nonsense bar food (like a very satisfying nachos plate) comes with a smile at this brasserie that's been serving locals since 1960, as attested by the beautiful vintage sign. You can bet the Rogers Cup will be onscreen if you're having a moment of crowd-itis, though the covered street-side patio might beckon instead. Pair your potato skins, loaded high with St-Guillaume cheddar, homemade sour cream and chives, with a pint or a Long Island iced tea to get back into the match mood.
220 Villeray St.
Basterd
A brand new spot in the condo village that's sprouted just south of the IGA Stadium, this handsome all-day spot - from brunch to nightlife - is within spitting distance of the action. The food has yet to impress, but I haven't tried the popular tacos. The cocktails and the L-shaped terrace make a visit worthwhile. Settle in for a shaded lunch and order a pitcher of sangria.
260 Gary-Carter St.
Café Saint-Henri
Cutting-edge style and third-wave treats mingle in this neighbourhood favourite, the HQ and main "coffee lab" of Montreal's Saint-Henri chain, set within the still-industrial section of Mile Ex a couple of blocks south of the park. The cool (literally) poured concrete furniture and patch-painted walls make this the best-looking place to take a breather for a splendid iced latte and either a flaky croissant or a veg-packed lunch bowl.
7335 Mile End St.
Brasserie Harricana
The crunchy, huge Fatoushie de Steph fattoush salad draws me here on a regular basis - or maybe it's the fact that this Jean-Talon brew pub( https://montrealgazette.com/life/food/local-food-reviews/restaurant-review-brasserie-harricana ) serves its inventive home concoctions in a variety of formats, including a five-ounce glass so you can build your own flight. The woodsy Saison Forestière is a current fave, and perfectly paired with the sharing platter, which features fun, party-mood appetizers like devilled eggs, toothsome yam dumplings and crudités with blue-cheese dressing.
95 Jean-Talon St. W.
Jiep Jiep
Last stop has got to be this Korean kitchen two blocks south of Jarry Park, where the ever-changing menu keeps locals coming back. Grab one of the few seats at the spot or order your daily special - from bibimbaps to spicy noodle soups to crunchy fried savoury crepes - from the counter and eat it in the park. The flavours here are homemade, a mix of traditional and experimental, always from the heart - a little messy sometimes, and that's the way we like it.
149 Jean-Talon St. W.
Related
6 new vegan restos to get your fresh food fix( https://montrealgazette.com/life/food/6-new-vegan-restos-to-bite-into )
Five Montreal brew pubs whose beers help beat the summer heat( https://montrealgazette.com/life/food/five-montreal-breweries-whose-beers-help-beat-the-summer-heat )
Five new Montreal ice cream shops to try( https://montrealgazette.com/life/food/five-new-montreal-ice-cream-shops-to-try )

