Here's what happened while you were unplugged and unconscious.
Montreal police looking for clues after gunfire in Point-St-Charles( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-police-looking-for-clues-after-shoot-out-in-pointe-st-charles )
Police responding to 911 calls about gunfire in Point-St-Charles found plenty of spent shell casings but little in the way of information. Officers arrived at the corner of Châteauguay and Charlevoix Sts. and found spent shell casings on the street and several bullet holes in the facade of a nearby residence. Police said the occupants of the building were not co-operating with investigators. A canine unit was deployed to find more clues to determine what sparked the incident.
British Columbia wildfire season ranked second-worst in province's history( https://montrealgazette.com/news/canada/celebrating-sir-wilfrid-laurier/british-columbia-wildfire-season-ranked-second-worst-in-provinces-history/wcm/1b627dd0-01a2-49e4-9e5c-c2acb56df7c1 )
A year after the single worst season for wildfires in British Columbia's history, government statistics indicate the 2018 wildfire season has already reached the second-worst mark, burning 945 square kilometres of land so far. Speaking from the Provincial Wildfire Coordination Centre in Kamloops, B.C., the province's chief fire information officer explained how the two seasons have been very different so far. In 2017, he said, the most troublesome fires all started in a three-day period in early July, burning for months and merging with other fires. While fires merging is a common phenomenon, he said the sheer volume of blazes ignited in those three days created weeks-long battles for firefighters. In contrast, 2018 has seen almost 600 more fires than 2017, but most were more manageable due to a wet spring.
NAFTA breakthrough appears imminent after year of fractious talks( https://montrealgazette.com/news/economy/into-the-final-hours-nafta-breakthrough-appears-imminent-after-years-of-fractious-talks/wcm/2c7385ee-12da-4e78-9b3f-834465358f6d )
The United States and Mexico are close to resolving their NAFTA differences and may wrap up as soon as Monday, creating an opening for Canada to rejoin talks between countries that trade more than a trillion dollars annually. As has been the case over a year of intense and sometimes fractious negotiations to update the decades-old North American Free Trade Agreement, it's not the end of the road. But optimism is running high of salvaging the pact that President Donald Trump has threatened to scrap. Significant breakthroughs between Mexico and the United States came during the past several days on automobiles and energy, according to three people familiar with the process who asked not to be named discussing private talks.
With files from Bloomberg News.
CREDIT: Katya Teague, Montreal Gazette

