Environment Canada issued a special weather statement for the Montreal area, warning of "significant rainfall" in the area over the next three days, precipitation that could lead to localized flooding.
The statement, issued Monday, covers the Châteauguay-La-Prairie area, Laval, Longueuil-Varennes and Montreal Island, and notes that southern Quebec will see "a significant warming trend along with significant rainfall amounts."
The rain combined with the runoff from the melting snow could cause localized flooding near small rivers, but won't lead to major flooding of homes on larger rivers such as Rivière des Prairies and the Ottawa River, said Alexandre Parent, a meteorologist from Environment Canada
"Last spring, we had several weeks of rainfall and warm temperatures that created the flooding (of homes)," Parent said.
"An event like this one (where we have) two or three days, of warm temperatures could have some impacts near small rivers."
Following last spring's widespread flooding( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood ), officials who monitor river levels are paying close attention to the height of the rivers and the upcoming forecasts, he said.
In the town of Rigaud, where more than 300 homeowners were flooded last spring, a spokesperson said officials are not expecting the upcoming rainfall to cause flooding.
"The rain will remove the snow that's on the ice, but the ice on the river is still thick and the rain won't melt the ice," said Marie-Andrée Gagnon, a town spokesperson.
Officials will patrol the area near the Ottawa River, just in case. As it does every year, the town has ordered 15,000 sandbags in case the river bursts its banks. Gagnon said some basements in homes close to the river flood every spring and residents are used to the inconvenience.
A warm front from the central United States is expected to move across the province over the next few days and temperatures are expected to gradually rise before reaching more than 10 degrees on Wednesday. Montreal experiences temperatures above 10 C in February about once every four years, Parent said. The record high for Feb. 21 is 14 C, which was recorded in 1981.
Rainfall amounts between 20 and 30 millimetres are expected between Monday evening and Wednesday. The rain combined with the runoff from the melting snow could cause localized flooding.
The forecast for Monday calls for a mix of sun and cloud with a high of 6 degrees Celsius, with rain beginning in the evening. Tuesday has a forecast high of 4 C, while on Wednesday it could rise to 11 C.
CREDIT: James Mennie, Montreal Gazette

