Trevor Coulton awoke at 4:30 a.m. Wednesday to an unfamiliar sound coming from the basement of his home on Brunet Ave. in Pointe Claire.
"It sounded like the washing machine filling up with water, only louder," said Coulton, who went downstairs to discover his semi-finished basement filling up with ice-cold water caused by a broken water main on a nearby street.
"I must have had 6.5-feet of water in the basement."
Coulton's home was among a dozen or so residences in the area that flooded or suffered water damage as a result of a burst 14-inch water main which forced the closure of streets in the neighbourhood east of the Pointe-Claire Village.
"The break was on Victoria Ave., near Ste.Claire Ave," said Pointe-Claire Mayor John Belvedere. "Around 10 or 12 houses were flooded. Some on Marie-Anne and Victoria streets, on Brunet, and Drayton Ave. The water came in people back yards and then worked its way across, all the way down to Lakeshore Rd. "
City crews eventually closed the main water valve in the affected area, but streams of water flowed down Brunet and Victoria avenues.
Snow plows also pushed aside pools of accumulated ice and slush, the cocktail of choice for Mother Nature this winter.
Belvedere said the city throw almost all of its available resources at the affected area, including Pointe-Claire Volunteer Rescue Unit, public security, local fire dept. and public works. "Even Baie-D'Urfé was here helping out," he said.
City crews were still busy pumping water from flooded basements on Wednesday afternoon.
Still, seeing people with flooded homes saddened the mayor.
"You hate to see this happen," said Belvedere, who lives nearby and even had some flood water accumulate at the foot of his own driveway.
Belvedere did not know why the water main burst, but suspects it may be due to significant fluctuations in winter temperatures from Tuesday through Wednesday.
Belvedere said extreme weather conditions appear to the new normal in Montreal, which has been hit with mix of snow, rain and freezing in recent weeks.
"It had to be the weather. We had minus-25 C then plus-6 C, so that's a perfect storm for a water main to break."
The mayor said bottled water would be distributed to residents in the area.
Coulton praised the city's efforts in dealing with the emergency situation.
"They were here pretty quick," he said. "City workers, the fire dept, even volunteers, it was nice to see. "
While some residents were forced to leave their homes due to the flood that knocked out basement furnaces, Coulton was relieved to be staying in his home Wednesday night.
"I've still got heat and electricity, so I'll be alright. A hot meal and a warm bed."
But many personal effects, such as family photographs, were likely lost in the flood, he added.
"That's the stuff you can't replace."
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
Related
Pointe-Claire emergency services pump out flooded Pioneer bar( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pointe-claire-emergency-services-pump-out-flooded-pioneer-bar )
Pointe-Claire's Camp de Base store goes out of business after 35 years( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pointe-claires-camp-de-base-store-goes-out-of-business-after-35-years )
Pointe-Claire Village in for six more weeks of road construction( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pointe-claire-village-in-for-six-more-weeks-of-road-construction )

