The Montreal Gazette is receiving a steady stream of questions from readers about COVID-19. We are doing our best to answer as many as we can.
Here's a glimpse into our mailbox.
Question: Given the whole COVID-19 situation going on, and various stores closing down such as LUSH and Apple, I find it surprising that Bulk Barn (a store that carries 95 per cent bulk products) is still open for business. I feel as though a bulk store as such is a big risk factor for spreading the virus. In the store, they have hundreds of scoops that are shared amongst the clients that come in. I have also seen many people putting their hands in the bins despite there being notices on the bins not to snack in the store. Just like everywhere else, they probably clean, wash their hands, wear gloves, etc. However, despite all of these precautions, I still feel as though the store should not be allowed to stay open.
Answer: Sabrina Saad, a supervisor at the Bulk Barn outlet at the Marché de l'ouest in Dollard-des-Ormeaux, said the stores remain open because they sell food, which is an essential service. "We have implemented a new program that allows customers to be served around the store so that way they don't touch anything and they're served by an employee who scoops their items for them. That way they're only touching things that are packaged. The employees are wearing gloves and they walk around and take fresh scoops for every customer." The Bulk Barn stores also are limiting the number of clients in the store at any given time. At Saad's Bulk Barn, there is usually only two or three people in the store at a time.
Question: In your article (last week) you wrote: "On Wednesday, the Canadian government passed an emergency COVID-19 bill that includes $2,000 per month in direct support through the Canada Revenue Agency to those who can¹t work because of COVID-19. Finance Minister Bill Morneau said benefits for workers would come as early as the first week of April." Who can apply for this benefit? Is it in addition to the Employment Insurance application? How does the government know who will benefit? My husband has been temporarily laid off, but as he works in the hotel industry there is not yet a realistic timeline as to when he will be re-hired. His company is filing the necessary paperwork.
Answer: The Canada Emergency Response Benefit will provide you with $500 a week for up to 16 weeks. The federal government will begin taking applications on April 6. You can apply to either Service Canada or the Canada Revenue Agency, but not both. To be eligible, you have to: reside in Canada; be 15 years old or over; have stopped working because of reasons related to COVID-19 or due to illness; or because you lost your job for reasons beyond your control. You can't be receiving Employment Insurance benefits for the same period. You also have to have earned a minimum of $5,000 in 2019 or in the 12 months prior to the application.
Question: I was surprised to see that Montreal Trudeau airport had many flight arrivals and departures (Wednesday) as well as scheduled flights for (Thursday). Am I having a bad dream? It doesn't look like exceptions or non-commercial flights only. There were a few flights to and from New York, Boston, Chicago, Orlando, Houston, as well as flights from Paris, Frankfurt, Qatar. Aren't Canadian borders supposed to be closed?
Answer: Air Canada confirmed it has cancelled much of its travel, but still has some flights. It is collaborating with the Canadian government to bring back Canadian citizens from abroad and there are flights for that from Bogota to Toronto Friday, from Algiers to Montreal Saturday, and from Buenos Aires to Toronto Sunday. There are also many flights daily within Canada. In addition, Air Canada is still flying one flight a day from Montreal to Boston, Chicago, Washington, Orlando and Fort Lauderdale. Air Canada also has up to two flights daily to Newark, N.J. A spokesperson from Air Canada didn't respond to requests for an interview.
bkelly@postmedia.com( mailto:bkelly@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz( http://www.twitter.com/brendanshowbiz )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow their updates on April 2 right here.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-ottawa-braces-for-flood-of-calls-for-financial-help/wcm/a63d16c1-d53e-483c-8763-0c7f2167c480/ ) All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).
Related
Coronavirus live updates: As cases soar, Montreal boosts police presence( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-ottawa-braces-for-flood-of-calls-for-financial-help/wcm/a63d16c1-d53e-483c-8763-0c7f2167c480/ )
Coronavirus: Legault says police will crack down on violations of public-health orders( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/coronavirus-legault-says-police-will-crack-down-on-violations-of-public-health-orders/wcm/2a47651a-7195-4f40-b914-1358fa463dc6/ )
Coronavirus: Negotiations underway for Quebec health-care workers' bonuses( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-negotiations-underway-for-quebec-health-care-workers-bonuses/wcm/ffb900eb-6de5-4f48-9cdd-08b5c907ce4d/ )
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus/ )

