After predicting more than 10 centimetres of snow Saturday and Sunday, Environment Canada's weather warning has changed slighting, targeting a prediction of 2-5 mm of freezing rain expected to fall Sunday( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67 ).
Following Wednesday's storm( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/yes-its-snowing-again-get-ready-for-tough-commute-home-montreal ), which led to a number of afternoon highway accidents resulting in one death and several injuries, Friday's weather warning was followed by a few centimetres of snow and up to 4 cm more to come Saturday. Temperatures on Saturday are expected to hover around -5 C.
For Sunday, the updated freezing-rain warning is calling for 2-5 mm to fall, with a possibility of 10 mm more north of the St. Lawrence. Temperatures in the Montreal area are expected to range from -3 C during the day to an evening low of -10 C.
"Freezing rain will begin near the United States border around midday Sunday and spread toward the Montreal, the north shore and the Centre-du-Québec regions later in the afternoon," the updated freezing-rain warning stated.
Sun is expected on Monday with a high of -5 C and a low of -14 C and clear skies through the evening. After much the same on Tuesday, temperatures are expected to jump slightly above freezing, with highs of 3 C and 4 C on Wednesday and Thursday, respectively.
The snow and freezing rain will make walking and driving more challenging around southern Quebec throughout the weekend.
Check on the city of Montreal's snow-clearing progress at ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement ). At 3 p.m., it was reporting that 31 per cent of city streets had been cleared, down from earlier in the day due to additional snow.
And since it is also snow season beyond our borders, here are a few snow-day photos from as far afield as Paris and the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.
A dog walker passes beneath the DuSable Michigan Avenue Bridge next to a frozen Chicago River, Friday, Feb. 9, 2018 in Chicago. The upper Midwest is preparing for a wintry blast as a winter storm is expected across the region, with forecasters saying up to a foot of snow is expected in some areas.
Madame Hélène (Eileen McMorris) pours some maple taffy for young Kaden as kids line up to try the traditional Carnaval de Quebec treat.
A snowman in Paris on Feb. 9, 2018 as the northwest of France received another snowfall, affecting transport in the Ile-de-France region especially in Paris.
Highland cattle at a stand during a snow blizzard as freezing weather and heavy snow sweeps across much of the UK, in Durham, England, Tuesday Feb. 6, 2018. Heavy snow has caused travel disruption for the morning commute.
The Chateau Frontenac team skipped by Jean Anderson, back, races the snow blizzard to victory at the ice canoe race as part of Quebec's winter carnival, Sunday, February 4, 2018 in Quebec City.
Icicles form along the face and mane of a horse that endures as snow continues to fall, Friday, Feb. 9, 2018 in Fenton Township, Mich.
The blizzard covers the road near to the small Pyrenees town of Isaba, around 75 km (47 miles) from Pamplona, northern Spain, Thursday, Feb. 8, 2018. The Northern Spain suffers an extreme low temperatures with heavy snowfall during the week.
Josh Niven, of Buchanan, Mich., foreground, and Alredo Arroyo, of La Porte, both with City's Pure Ice in La Porte, carve sculptures from blocks of ice at Plaza 618, during a snow storm that closed schools, government offices and businesses, Friday, Feb. 9, 2018, in La Porte, Ind. The Winter Fest ice carving event was postponed two weeks ago because of warm temperatures.
Michael Lobo, right, stops to give Paul Massey, left, a battery jump Tuesday, Jan. 30, 2018 on Cottage Street in New Bedford, Mass., as an unexpectedly heavy snow storm rolls over the area.
A man clears snow from sidewalk, Friday, Feb. 9, 2018, in Wheeling, Ill., as a winter storm makes its way through several Midwest states.
Snow covers eight-year-old Eduardo Chavez after a morning of sledding in Humboldt Park following a storm that dumped more than 7 inches of snow on February 9, 2018 in Chicago, Illinois. The city is bracing for upwards to 6 more inches before the weather system passes through the area on Sunday.
Spent brass lies in the snow during the women's 7.5km biathlon sprint at the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, Saturday, Feb. 10, 2018.
CREDIT: Denise Duguay, Montreal Gazette

