Last month, seeking another playing opportunity in the Canadian Football League, Jermaine Robinson flew from Sioux Falls, S.D., to Atlanta to attend a free-agent camp being operated by the Alouettes.
Between the flight, rental car, food and the entrance fee, Robinson likely spent close to US$1,000. He displayed enough to be invited to mini-camp and, since May 20, has been attending training camp at Olympic Stadium, attempting to crack the team's roster.
Robinson has a degree in criminal justice from the University of Toledo. He was working as a youth counsellor at a juvenile centre in Sioux Falls while playing Arena ball and was contemplating entering the military. He didn't need to try to play for a team that hasn't reached the playoffs since 2014.
Montreal Alouettes Jermaine Robinson stretches during a team practice in Montreal on Monday May 28, 2018.
"I still think there's something out there left for me," said the 29-year-old Pittsburgh native. "I'm still young. I don't think I've reached my potential. I think this year I can finally put it together and become the dominant player I was in 2016.
"You don't get this opportunity often. People don't understand the CFL's a great game," added the 6-foot-3, 205 pounder, who has played for both Ottawa and Hamilton. "When you don't play it, that's when you realize how amazing it was when you did. It puts everything in perspective. I want it even more than before. You understand the importance of it and the opportunity that you have."
Montreal fans should have vivid memories of Robinson. It was during a game on June 30, 2016, at Molson Stadium that he administered a helmet-to-helmet hit on former Als receiver Duron Carter after he scored a touchdown( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/duron-carters-sideline-antics-one-of-many-alouettes-lowlights-against-redblacks ). Carter then taunted the Redblacks bench, knocking down head coach Rick Campbell. Both Robinson and Carter were subsequently suspended by the league.
"It was a fun game," Robinson remembered, laughing. "As a fan, you want to see that type of intensity."
Montreal Alouettes Duron Carter makes a catch in front of Ottawa Red Blacks Jermaine Robinson during Canadian Football League game in Montreal Friday August 29, 2014.
Following a stellar 46-game collegiate career, Robinson turned pro with the Sioux Falls Storm before signing with Ottawa as a free agent. He spent 135 days on the injured list in 2015 after suffering a wrist injury against Montreal, and was limited to two regular-season games, although he dressed for the Grey Cup loss against Edmonton.
He played 10 games the following season, intercepting a pass, before being released in early September. Eleven days later, he signed as a free-agent with the Tiger-Cats, starting four games.
A free agent in 2017, he worked out for the Kansas City Chiefs and had been expecting an invitation to mini-camp, but that fell through. Instead, Robinson played in the Spring League - arguably made famous this year by the appearance of Johnny Manziel, who then signed with Hamilton - before returning to Sioux Falls.
"You have to love football to play at that level," Robinson said, and he wasn't kidding. Players received barely more than $200, provided their team won. The per diem for road games was $20. Travel was by bus, practices at night - to allow the players to hold down day jobs - and they had to carry their equipment to practice.
"You're doing it for the passion," he said. "To be honest, after that season, I figured football was over for me. It's hard to get into the CFL, just because of the ratio."
Robinson is serious about prolonging his career, if possible. After spending so much time injured in 2015, he decided to spend the winter in Ottawa, while modifying his diet. He now eats five times daily, drinks protein shakes after workouts and before sleep. He takes fish oil in the morning and no longer eats fried food or drinks juice.
Robinson has been practicing at safety, his natural position, through the opening nine days of Als camp. And he has seen plenty of time with the starting defence, while Joe Burnett recovered from a scalp issue that prevented him from wearing his helmet for several days. Burnett also returned to Florida last weekend to attend his grandfather's funeral.
But Burnett returned on Monday and, although he never has played safety in the CFL, he is getting starter's reps. Burnett also was signed in February as a free agent from Calgary.
Robinson, predictably, doesn't want to look too far ahead.
"Just go out there and play. Give it all I've got," he explained. "At the end of the day they'll pick both of us. Or Joe. Or whomever they pick. I'm just happy to be out here and have the opportunity to play and compete.
"Out here, nobody has any advantage. We're just names on a board right now. We're all competing. If I worry about those things, it's going to hold us back. The coaches are just trying to find the best DBs as a group."
The Als launch their exhibition schedule Thursday night, at Ottawa.
Notes: Veteran linebacker Chip Cox still hasn't started practicing with the Als, although he returned to Montreal several days ago. According to GM Kavis Reed, Cox is suffering from a stomach virus. There's no sense rushing him back at this point, since he wouldn't have played against the Redblacks. ...
Although head coach Mike Sherman wants to take as many players as possible to Ottawa, he's not yet prepared to divulge his plans at quarterback for the game.
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com( mailto:hzurkowsky@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1( http://twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1 )
Related
'Time for a change,' Burnett says on departure from Stamps( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/alouettes-time-for-a-change-burnett-says-on-departure-from-stamps )
Alouettes' Duron Carter ready to lock horns in Redblacks rematch( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/alouettes-duron-carter-ready-to-lock-horns-in-redblacks-rematch )
Duron Carter's sideline antics one of many Alouettes lowlights against Redblacks( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/duron-carters-sideline-antics-one-of-many-alouettes-lowlights-against-redblacks )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

