QUEBEC - One day after accusing Premier Philippe Couillard of lying in his attacks against them, the Coalition Avenir Québec has again come under fire from the Liberals - this time for its attitude toward women.
But an indignant CAQ returned the volley saying they are victims of a Liberal smear campaign of "organized lies," and they aren't going to take it anymore.
"Yesterday we were against immigrants. Today we're against women," CAQ MNA Nathalie Roy said at a hastily called news conference. "What's next? We're against seniors?
"These kind of accusations are completely ridiculous, unworthy of his function."
The he in question is Natural Resources Minister Pierre Moreau, who ignited a storm in the legislature Thursday in answering a question from CAQ MNA Éric Caire, the party's point person on public administration.
Caire rose in the house during question period to express his indignation over the naming of the deputy-minister of the energy and natural resources, Dominique Savoie, to the board of directors of Hydro-Québec.
Savoie was booted out of her job as a deputy-minister in the transport department two years ago by Couillard following allegations of mismanagement by Quebec's auditor-general.
A furious Caire said the fact that the government named this "bad administrator" to such a prestigious position smacked of indecency.
"What is indecent is to see the MNA for La Peltrie (Caire) rise each time to discredit the public sector," Moreau fired across the floor in response, reminding the house that the CAQ has spoken in the past about the need to purge the civil service of people who don't think like it does.
Moreau then described Savoie as a person of great integrity, cleared of all accusations against her. He accused Caire of showing a lack of respect.
A series of nasty unprintable words followed from at least two CAQ MNAs, leading Moreau to accuse Caire of swearing at the deputy-speaker of the house, Maryse Gaudreault, who was acting as house referee Thursday.
"This mirrors perfectly the attitude of the CAQ towards women, towards minorities, towards the civil service," Moreau said.
Later, meeting reporters, Moreau went further, saying the CAQ sometimes "displays misogynistic tendencies."
But the CAQ took it in the teeth from the Parti Québécois as well on Thursday with leader Jean-François Lisée calling on the party to make public its values test for immigrants.
Lisée read a copy of an email sent by the CAQ to a researcher on the identity issue, Micheline Labelle, in which the CAQ says it will only make the test public if it wins the October general election and forms a government.
"In the case of the values test, either you propose it or you shut up," Lisée told reporters.
A CAQ aide later confirmed the email reflects party policy. And if the CAQ formed a government, the values test would be drafted by bureaucrats in the Immigration Ministry, not by CAQ politicians.
"Did the PQ make public its charter of values before the election?" the aide asked. "No."
Related
PQ and Liberals team up to attack François Legault's immigration policy( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/pq-and-liberals-team-up-to-attack-francois-legaults-immigration-policy )
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/philipauthier( http://Twitter.com/philipauthier )
CREDIT: Philip Authier, Montreal Gazette



