Ever wonder which Canadian city has the most thunderstorms? It's Windsor, Ont.
What about the windiest? That dubious honour goes to St. John's, Newfoundland.
For all those who love weather lore, Environment Canada released an analysis Monday of 30 years of weather data for Canada's 100 largest cities on a Weather Winners Web site.
The results are somewhat surprising but are also hoped to be useful to governments and the tourism and recreation industries.
"The study analyzes 72 categories of weather and ranks Canada's cities according to their most notable weather features," Environment Canada meteorologist David Phillips said in a statement.
"Most communities have something they can either brag about or curse."
The analysis, conducted by Mr. Phillips, includes categories such as most high wind-chill days (Yellowknife), sunniest city (Medicine Hat, Alta.) and the snowiest city (Gander, Nfld.).
Overall, people living in St. John's and Gander are the hardiest, according to the Statistics Canada data. The two cities are tied for the toughest weather in Canada. The communities were ranked on 13 categories of tough weather, including amounts of fog, snow, winds or freezing rain.
Residents of Victoria and Nanaimo, B.C., meanwhile, are living in two of the most pleasant weather cities, with both rating highest in the "most comfortable climate" category.
They were found to have the best combination of 23 categories of "comfortable" weather, including mild winters, lots of sunshine, little fog, low humidity and light winds.
Montreal has few extremes in temperature but definitely experiences a range of seasons, so it was rated Canada's "quintessential" weather city, followed by Fredericton and Kingston.
The top 100 cities were selected from 2001 Canadian census data, on the basis of population.
All cities in the data have a population of 15,000 or more people and an official weather station nearby where Environment Canada instruments are used and its observing procedures are followed.

