A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Expect to see more Bixis on Montreal streets this spring( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-to-expand-bixi )
The city of Montreal hopes to expand the Bixi bike-sharing service to more neighbourhoods next year, Mayor Valérie Plante said Wednesday.
"We intend to enlarge the zone that is served to make the service available in more boroughs, to ensure that in areas that are less well served, people can try it and take advantage of this service," the mayor said at a meeting of the executive committee.
Plante said expanding to more boroughs won't happen until next year, but she would announce some surprises for this year's edition of the bike-sharing program at a news conference on Tuesday to kick off the Bixi season, which runs April 15 to Nov. 15.
"I know that Montrealers are waiting impatiently. They are very excited about the idea of getting back on their bikes," she said.
Workers have already started installing Bixi stations around the city - a harbinger of spring despite the snow flurries expected Wednesday evening, Plante noted.
After the meeting, Éric Alan Caldwell, the executive committee member responsible for urban planning, transportation and the Office de consultation publique de Montréal, said Montrealers can expect to see more Bixis in the streets this year.
"A signal was clearly sent from the first days of our administration that we like Bixi, that we want Bixi to be part of mobility in Montreal, that we want to develop the model, that it belongs in the city and it belongs in Montreal," he said.
Montreal getting ready for influx of asylum seekers( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-ready-for-influx-of-migrants )
The city of Montreal is braced for a new influx of asylum seekers in the coming months, but will not be housing them in the Olympic Stadium, the executive-committee member responsible for housing and diversity said Wednesday.
"We're expecting a flood when the nice weather arrives," Magda Popeanu said to reporters at city hall after a meeting of the city's executive committee.
"We're prepared. We've been working with the office that was set up last year to deal with the migrants who came across the border," she said.
"We have an action plan for housing them and taking care of them and we've also been working hard with the Quebec Department of Immigration and Diversity," Popeanu said.
The city will use a variety of buildings, such as schools, to house the newcomers, she said. But unlike last year, when beds were set up in the Olympic Stadium, it will not requisition the Big O, she said.
Bon Jovi's Montreal concerts postponed due to illness( http://montrealgazette.com/news/bon-jovis-montreal-concerts-cancelled-due-to-illness )
Concert promoter Evenko announced on its Facebook page that Bon Jovi has postponed their Bell Centre performances for April 4 and 5 because band and crew members are sick with the flu.
The concerts have been rescheduled for May 17 and 18, Evenko said.
Those who have tickets for the April 4 show will be able to attend May 17, while those who were going to the April 5 show will see Bon Jovi on May 18.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

