He sent explicit sex messages, made lewd comments at work and tried to caress her in the operating room. He offered her thousands of dollars to sleep with him. Sometimes, he followed her after work.
These allegations of harassment are outlined in a legal suit filed in Quebec Superior Court Wednesday. A McGill University Health Centre respiratory therapist alleges anesthesiologist Richard Robinson harassed her from 2014 to 2016. The suit alleges that the abuse started when she was 21, a recent graduate who had just landed her first job in 2013 at the Montreal General Hospital, and Robinson, almost three times her age, was her boss.
Despite complaining to her direct superiors, the hospital union and human relations, and finally, to the MUHC director of professional services, the sexting abuse continued, the suit alleges.
The woman, who cannot be identified because of a court-ordered publication ban on her name, claims he sent her more than 200 explicit texts.
"I literally sought help everywhere," the woman, now 26, told the Montreal Gazette in an interview this week. "I'm feeling heartbroken."
The hospital refused to comment publicly. The MUHC does not tolerate sexual harassment in the workplace, has comprehensive harassment policies and treats all such complaints diligently, officials said in a statement. The hospital denied it failed to protect its employee until 2016, when she took legal action.
However, the suit alleges that Dr. Robinson ignored at least two warnings in 2014 from hospital officials, including Ewa Sidorowicz, director of professional services (DPS), to end his inappropriate behaviour, and that the victim's colleagues and superiors were aware of the ongoing harassment.
Initial feelings of relief that the situation was being handled quickly faded, the woman said. The court documents allege Robinson cornered her at the hospital, saying that he was untouchable because of his "thick skin."
The woman alleges he sent her a Christmas card in 2014 with an image of a Paul Klee painting of two naked children by a fireplace: "You and me in a past life ... we had 10 children (six girls) and lots of sex."
Despite demands she not be assigned shifts with Robinson, she on occasion had to work evenings and weekends when he was the only anesthesiologist in the operating room. "It was terrifying sitting behind sterile drapes with the monitors," she told the Montreal Gazette. "I felt so helpless."
He offered her money to sleep with him, the suit alleges. Afraid of finding herself alone with him, the woman arranged for colleagues to accompany her in hospital hallways, to the elevator and to her car. She claims in her suit colleagues told her that Robinson frequently asked them personal questions about her, particularly about her love life.
She worked for a few weeks at another MUHC hospital, but the suit alleges he continued to text her. The claim goes on to allege he wrote of his desire for her, remarking on her beauty, admitting his shame at her distress, and describing his sexual fantasies. At times, he apologized for being so stupidly besotted with her, the suit alleges, texting "I just wanted to kiss you, hold you, make love to you."
According to claims in the lawsuit, which have not been proven in court, the texting continued unabated, sometimes dozens a day: "I want to wrap my legs around you."
"If we were lovers you would be so comfortable with me."
"Felt creepy after I stroked your arm and said you were nice (that's) not really me I just I never get to talk to you - probably - hence all my texting."
According to the suit, he sent her an image of his naked legs, with the message, "This picture would be much better if your legs were in it kicking mine! Night Night E."
A giant bouquet of flowers delivered Dec 2015 at the operating room for her, unsigned but everyone knew it was from Robinson, she alleges. In the lawsuit, she claims he followed with a text: "I mean - I'm trying to persue you. Persue means - persistently trying to form a sexual relationship Oxford duct, Sophie was persued by a number of good looking men. (sic)" Horrified, she told him to stop.
She informed hospital officials, again, including the head of anesthesiology. The suit alleges she was then called to a meeting, in January 2016, with Sidorowicz, head of professional services. The therapist showed Sidorowicz explicit text messages from Robinson.
Sidorowicz put the woman's phone aside and only asked about 'his professional competencies,'" the lawsuit alleges. "I felt like a rat in a cage."
The abuse continued, she alleges.
The union suggested she take a medical leave of absence. They told her they could file a grievance, but the professional order of Quebec physicians, the College des medecins, rarely investigates.
In fact, Robinson is under investigation for misconduct by the College des medecins, and is expected to be called before the College disciplinary committee in early 2018.
The woman said she suffered nightmares, depression and suicidal thoughts. "I felt helpless. I went from being a bubbly and happy person to someone depressed. It affected my family and my work."
Malpractice lawyer Jean-Pierre Menard filed a complaint Jan. 2016 with the MUHC medical examiner who then demanded the hospital disciplinary committee look into the matter. In its questioning, the committee asked "if I wore sexy clothes, big earrings, perfume. Was I flirty?" the woman recalled. "I couldn't believe it. We all wear scrubs!" The burden of proof is terrible on the victim, Menard said. "As if what she wore could justify anything," he added. "There should be zero tolerance for sexual abuse."
Menard is suing Robinson for $260,000 in damages for his client. "It's been 20 months since the MUHC disciplinary committee got involved, and it's come to nothing," said Menard, who expects this case to start a flood in the health milieu similar to the #metoo hashtag of women coming forward that rocked the entertainment field.
"We took this case as a matter of principle," Menard said.
Robinson is currently working at the Montreal General's intensive care unit.
Menard's client is currently on maternity leave.
Had she known all that she would have to go through by coming forward, she would have quit working there, she says. But she also helps train young respiratory therapists, and wants to help them avoid any possible future issues because they resemble the eager student she once was, she said. "They look like me." cfidelman@postmedia.com
Credit: CHARLIE FIDELMAN; The Gazette
Illustration A hospital worker, who cannot be identified, filed charges in court on Wednesday against an MUHC doctor. The suit alleges the anesthesiologist harassed her for years. PIERRE OBENDRAUF

