A storm that is expected to leave 10 centimetres of snow in the Montreal area was causing traffic slowdowns in the city and at the airport on Wednesday afternoon.
Two highways on the South Shore were closed after multiple-vehicle accidents. Westbound Highway 20 west was completely closed near Mont St-Hilaire due to an accident involving several vehicles, including two jackknifed transport trucks, that has left at least 50 vehicles stopped on the road. Several people are reportedly injured, two of them in critical condition. The highway has been closed indefinitely.
"We have to clear the highway, then tow all the vehicles," said the SQ's Montérégie spokesperson Joyce Kemp, adding that minibuses have been dispatched to the scene to take people who are not injured away from the area. In the meantime drivers are advised to take the 116 toward Montreal.
Highway 30 was closed in both directions between St-Constant and Candiac because of another accident involving several vehicles and at least two jackknifed trucks. One westbound lane was reopened just before 4 p.m.
As well, Highway 10 west was closed due to a multi-car collision near Chemin du Ruisseau-Barré, in Marieville.
Aside from those major accidents, a lot of cars have gone off the road, Kemp said, encouraging drivers to slow down, keep a safe distance and prepare for a variety of challenging road conditions.
Several flights in and out of Trudeau Airport were delayed or cancelled Wednesday. To keep up with the latest flight schedules, visit admtl.com/en/flights( http://www.admtl.com/en/flights ).
The Société de transport de Montréal advised people to allow for extra time for the afternoon commute, and warned that providing service to wheelchair users at accessible bus stops might be difficult because of the storm.
The forecast for Montreal calls for a steady snowfall - a rate of about one centimetre per hour - through to 10 p.m.
With motorists already expecting a difficult rush hour, wind gusts of up to 26 km/h are expected to further complicate their commute.
Wednesday's snowfall occurs as the city of Montreal reports 60 per cent of its streets have been cleared since the last substantial snowfall, on Sunday.
This report will be updated.
CREDIT: T'Cha Dunlevy, Montreal Gazette

