A major forest fire is in Quebec's Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean region continued to spread this weekend, with authorities sealing off roads and urging anyone in the sparsely populated area to leave.
The blaze covered 62,396 hectares on Sunday, double the size compared to Friday. It is the largest of 20 forest fires in the province as of Sunday, an increase of seven from the day before.
The fires' impact were felt as far away as Montreal, where Environment Canada issued a smog warning Sunday afternoon.
"High concentrations of fine particulates are expected and will result in poor air quality," said the warning, which said that poor air quality from a peat fire in the Kamouraska area would persist until late in the day. Smog particularly affects asthmatic children and people with respiratory ailments or heart disease, who should avoid intense physical activity, Environment Canada warned.
"The biggest concern with this fire, as usually is with out-of-control fires, is the weather," said Mélanie Morin, a spokesperson for SOPFEU, the agency that oversees forest fire prevention in the province. "This fire started Tuesday and has consistently grown day after day despite our suppression efforts."
Her organization has made several targeted strikes to protect strategic points like bridges, certain outfitters and the Péribonka IV hydroelectric station. The flames were only 1.2 kilometres from the station on Sunday morning.
Morin said they are patrolling the area, doing strategic attacks and have set up a sprinkler system near the installation.
Maxence Huard-Lefebvre, a spokesman for Hydro-Québec, said they are monitoring the situation closely, but there is no concern for any community being impacted by a power outage.
Péribonka is dormant as a preventative measure but it's one of more than 60 stations that are linked as part of an interconnected network.
The fierce Lac-St-Jean fire is one of at least 12 current blazes in Quebec - but the only one considered out of control.
The fire started north of Dolbeau-Mistassini, in an area known as Chutes-des-Passes, first heading east for a few days before winds shifted the fire south towards Péribonka.
About 100 employees of the forest fire agency, known as SOPFEU, and about 60 forest firefighters are battling the blaze with another 18 reinforcements ready, and about 200 more arriving on Monday, said Josée Poitras, another SOPFEU spokesperson.
Explosive development of a wildfire north of Lake Saint-Jean in Quebec, Canada.
- CIRA (@CIRA_CSU) June 19, 2020
Planes and helicopters are being used to combat the blaze, with temperatures expected to feel like 40 C in the area, further complicating the work of firefighters on the ground.
It's too early to say what damage has been done as fires sometime miss pockets of area.
"There are many chalets in the area and the two affected regional county municipalities, Maria-Chapdelaine and the Fjord-du-Saguenay, have been scrambling since the start of this fire to reach the owners of these chalets," said Josee Poitras, another SOPFEU spokeswoman.
"There are chalets that have burned down. Fortunately, there are no casualties and no one has been trapped by the fire."
Quebec's Department of Forestry and Lands has closed an area of 100 kilometres by 80 kilometres, setting up 10 road blocks.
Premier François Legault said he was concerned about the situation in both regions and said the priority was to keep citizens out of harm's way.
"Our priority: the safety of Quebecers in nearby areas," Legault tweeted Friday night.
2/2 Une ligne téléphonique de @ServicesQuebec est maintenant disponible pour informer la population sur la situation des feux de forêt :
1-877-644-4545
- François Legault (@francoislegault) June 20, 2020
Environment Canada meteorologist Alain Roberge said that warm, dry weather was likely to persist. Despite rain in the forecast for Saturday, it may not be enough to help firefighters in the area.
"The worst part is that when the first showers arrive, they are often accompanied by thunderstorms," Roberge said. "So even if the rain is there, lightning storms can create new fires."
The fires are creating heavy smog in some parts of the province.
A fire in a bog near Rivière-Ouelle, in the Lower St. Lawrence region, forced the evacuation of nearby homes after winds created a smoky haze.
Municipal firefighters responded along with SOPFEU teams to that fire, which covered about 250 hectares on Saturday.
The provincial agency reports 444 fires this year - double the annual average on this date over the past decade.
Lightning strikes are considered the source of only three blazes - the vast majority have been caused by people.
An open fire ban was renewed in several Quebec regions on Friday.
With reporting by the Montreal Gazette
Related
Out-of-control fire the size of 40,000 football fields is burning in Quebec

