Here's what happened on the night restaurants reopened
The Griffintown REM station has a name and should be ready by late 2023 At a press conference, Mayor Valérie Plante said she hoped calling it Griffintown-Bernard Landry would put a sometimes bitter name debate to rest. "I think this is a great way of honouring the memory not only of all the Irish people who came to Montreal and contributed so much into how it has evolved and continue to do so, but also honouring the memory of Bernard Landry, our premier who actually was behind the idea of Cité du Multimédia," Plante said. Harout Chitilian, executive director of corporate affairs and development with CDPQ Infra, said the loss of almost two months of construction time due to the COVID-19 pandemic has not necessarily delayed the completion of the REM, with engineering work being done at a distance during the shutdown.
Sticking with naming things, Route 139 in Granby will be renamed after Jean Lapierre The former Shefford MP and political analyst died in 2016. Transport Minister François Bonnardel announced the change Monday in Granby, along with members of Lapierre's family including his children Marie-Anne and Jean-Michel. The renaming was approved by the Commission de toponymie du Québec on June 18. The road was formerly called David-Bouchard Blvd. S., in honour of a former mayor of Granby. The road north of Route 112 will keep Bouchard's name. The city of Granby is also building a public square to be named after Lapierre.
Montreal says it will review its procedures on land repossessions The announcement comes after a Montreal Gazette article exposed the civil service's attempts to acquire lots in a field in Pointe-aux-Trembles without paying their owners. However, the Plante administration's review will be forward-looking and doesn't promise a remedy for the owners in Pointe-aux-Trembles. Asked whether the city would return the lots those lots or compensate their owners, Laurence Houde-Roy, a spokesperson for the city executive committee, said: "We won't redo the past but we'll ensure that the procedures are more clear in the future."
With files from Presse Canadienne.

