This week's return to school for thousands of young Quebecers is a disaster, Québec solidaire charged on Wednesday, with one party MNA describing the operation as "a mess."
On Monday, about 150 scientists and health professionals called on the provincial government to demand that physical distancing and face masks be mandatory in classrooms. They also wanted school ventilation systems to be improved and families be given the option to distance learning for their children should they desire it.
On Wednesday, Quebec solidaire MNA Vincent Marissal, the father of four children, severely criticized Education Minister Jean-François Roberge's performance, saying the government's indecision on its back-to-school operation is causing parents undue stress because of a lack of information on how it will unfold
Marissal said he received messages from his children's schools on Saturday "that told us they didn't know exactly how (the return) was supposed to work."
"Right now, it's parents - and by extension their children - who are stuck dealing with the government's indecision," he said. "It's very stressful. We had difficult months because of the lockdown ... and now I have two (children) who are to go back tomorrow and the situation is completely up in the air. I don't know what minister Roberge is working on."
Marissal also compared the government's recent recruitment drive for teachers to the last-minute installation of air conditioners in long-term care facilities
"It took a heat wave for somebody to finally wake up," he said. "Enough with the 'don't worry, be happy.' This return to school is a mess.
Marissal said Roberge, knowing full well about the shortage of teachers, should have acted sooner.
Liberal MNA André Fortin was equally blunt: "The government spent all of the summer saying there were issues, that everything would be fine ... We are now seeing a certain worry because it seems that everything was done at the last minute."
Fortin said many of the back-to-school details were "unclear," asking, for example, what medical conditions would allow a student or teacher to be kept from returning to a classroom.
"Today we don't know how many students and teachers will be in class, and that leads to all kinds of problems for the return," he said, adding that he would have liked to have seen an option for distance learning, if only on a temporary basis, for families unsure if they could be exempted from the return.
Fortin also criticized the disorganization of school bus transport in the Quebec City area, noting that such transportation is guaranteed by law.
Related
Back-to-school plan inadequate, Montreal doctors and scientists say in letter to Quebec
Allison Hanes: Quebec's back-to-school plan fails to reassure parents
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

