Welcome to today's live coronavirus pandemic coverage. Check this post throughout the day on Tuesday, May 26. Questions/comments? ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Quebec to add A/C, fans to lower temperatures in CHSLDs
Report details 'disturbing' issues in Ontario long-term care homes
Quebec to provide US$200 million to save the Cirque du Soleil
Province to temporarily ban commercial evictions
Ontario to disclose 'troubling' report about seniors' residences
NHL to announce plan to resume season
Montreal day camps can open - but will they?
Quebec reports 614 new cases, 70 more deaths
Provincial ombudsperson to investigate seniors' residences
More below
4:30 p.m. NHL outlines plans to resume hockey season
NHL commissioner Gary Bettman is to provide an update on the league's plan to resume the 2019-2020 season. You can watch it live below.
4:25 p.m. Montreal to start reopening splash pads
Following up on an earlier item about the pandemic and the heat wave, the city of Montreal has just announced that boroughs will "gradually" reopen splash pads, starting today.
In addition, the city said it is "also preparing to exceptionally open some of its infrastructure during future heat waves so that Montrealers can cool off there since shopping centers and libraries could possibly still be closed."
4:15 p.m. 'It will be different'
This afternoon, a reporter asked Economy Minister Pierre Fitzgibbon about the province's plan to reopen malls, starting outside the Montreal region on Monday.
Here's what Fitzgibbon said.
4:10 p.m. Quebec to add A/C, fans to lower temperatures in CHSLDs
At a press conference this afternoon, Mylène Drouin, director of public health for Montreal, said the COVID-19 situation is stabilizing on the island, with both the number of new cases and hospitalizations going down. At the same time, testing is on the rise.
But she asked Montrealers to remain vigilant. "The virus is still circulating," Drouin said.
With Montreal in the throes of a heat wave, she said her department has been working on a plan to adapt heat wave mitigation measures to the new reality of COVID-19.
It's a particularly difficult time, with many air-conditioned areas such as mall closed due to the pandemic, and many seniors in self-isolation without air conditioning.
Simultaneously dealing with two risks - heat waves and COVID-19 transmission - will be "a big challenge" this summer, Drouin said.
She noted that the current spell of hot weather does not technically meet the criteria of extreme heat or a heat wave.
But she said her department has asked the city of Montreal to open splash pads as soon as possible so families can cool down.
And public health is working with the city to find ways, while respecting social distancing, to allow the opening of some public places - such as arenas - where people could cool down.
She urged people to drink a lot of water, try to spend time in air-conditioned rooms or rooms with lower temps and take cool baths or showers. In addition, Montrealers should check on people who are isolated, particularly older people who are more at risk in heat waves.
Also at risk are children and people with mental-health issues or alcohol/drug addictions, she said.
Mobile COVID-19 testing is being curtailed due to the hot weather, with reduced hours to protect workers and the public, Drouin said.
Caroline Dusablon, an emergency measures coordinator with the Quebec health department, told the press conference that Quebec has authorized the installation of mobile air conditioning and cooling fans in CHSLDs (long-term care centres).
"Some of these measures are already in progress or completed," Dusablon said.
2:50 p.m. Dining out in a transparent lampshade
A French designer has developed an oversized lampshade made of transparent plastic that encases a customer's head, an effort to entice diners to return
- Reuters (@Reuters) May 25, 2020
2:30 p.m. Prepare now for second wave, opposition parties tell Legault
The Legault government must move now to prepare for a possible second wave of COVID-19, the opposition parties at the legislature said today.
Read our full story, by Philip Authier.
2:25 p.m. Full report on Ontario long-term care homes
Following up on the previous item about the situation in Ontario long-term care homes, here's the full report by the Canadian Armed Forces.
2:20 p.m. Report details 'disturbing' issues in Ontario long-term care homes
From The Canadian Press:
TORONTO - A military report on five long-term care homes in Ontario details "horrific" allegations such as rooming COVID-19 positive patients with uninfected ones, insect infestations and aggressive resident feeding that led to choking.
Ontario Premier Doug Ford called it "the most heart-wrenching report I have ever read in my entire life."
"The reports they provided us were heartbreaking, they were horrific," he said. "It's shocking that this can happen here in Canada. It's gut-wrenching."
Ford called in military assistance last month for five long-term care homes dealing with COVID-19 outbreaks. After reading the report, Ford said it's clear the system is broken. He said he is now not ruling out a public inquiry, which he previously declined.
The allegations detailed by Canadian Armed Forces members include failure to isolate COVID-19-positive patients and allowing them to wander outside of their rooms.
At one home, the military reported "significant" fecal contamination in resident rooms, cockroach infestations, residents not being bathed for weeks, and some crying out for help for more than two hours.
Residents at another home were bed-bound for weeks, with a "significant" number having pressure ulcers. Due to severe staffing issues, "most" residents were not receiving three meals a day, the report alleges.
Since members of the military began providing operational assistance in Ontario, 14 of them have become infected with COVID-19.
2:05 p.m. Quebec to provide US$200 million to save the Cirque du Soleil; province to temporarily ban commercial evictions
Premier François Legault, who celebrates his 63rd birthday today, is not holding a press conference.
However, Economy Minister Pierre Fitzgibbon met reporters briefly to provide an update.
Fitzgibbon said:
The Quebec government is freeing up US$200 million to help save the Cirque du Soleil. He said under the deal, the province will have an option to buy the Cirque, which is struggling due to the pandemic
Quebec will introduce legislation in the coming weeks to temporarily ban commercial evictions due to non-payment of rent during the pandemic. He urged landlords to apply for the Canada Emergency Commercial Rent Assistance
He could not comment on reports that Quebec will on Wednesday announce that campgrounds in the province can reopen in June.
Malls across Quebec apart from Greater Montreal can reopen on Monday but Fitzgibbon would not comment on when Greater Montreal malls can open their doors.
Le Conseil des ministres accordé une aide financière jusqu'à 200 M$ US pour la relance du Cirque du Soleil.
"Les impôts du Cirque vont continuer à être payés au Québec et au Canada. Le salaire des dirigeants va être très raisonnable. Le siège social va être au Québec."
- Radio-Canada Info (@RadioCanadaInfo) May 26, 2020
1:15 p.m. Ontario to disclose 'disturbing' report about seniors' residences
At 1:30 p.m., Ontario Premier Doug Ford is expected to discuss the "disturbing findings" of Armed Forces personnel working in some of the province's seniors' residences.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau this morning revealed that the military had prepared a report on the findings. He would not elaborate until Ontario commented.
Canadian soldiers are also helping in Quebec long-term care centres.
But provincial officials today said the military has sent no report about Quebec facilities, colleague Philip Authier tells me from Quebec City.
There are reports this afternoon that the military is working on a report about the situation in Quebec.
You can watch Ford's press conference live below:
1:10 p.m. WHO warns of 'second peak' in areas where COVID-19 declining
Countries where coronavirus infections are declining could still face an "immediate second peak" if they let up too soon on measures to halt the outbreak, the World Health Organization said on Monday.
Read our full story
12:35 p.m. NHL to announce plan to resume season
At 4:30 p.m., NHL commissioner Gary Bettman is scheduled to provide an update on the league's plan to resume the 2019-2020 season.
Under the plan, the Montreal Canadiens are in the playoffs
NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman will make an announcement at 4:30 p.m. ET regarding the Return to Play Plan for the 2019-20 season. It will air on NBCSN & NHL Network in the U.S., Sportsnet & TVA Sports in Canada, & streamed live on and NHL social platforms.
- NHL.com (@NHLdotcom) May 26, 2020
12:10 p.m. Federal officials provide update
Federal ministers and Dr. Theresa Tam, Canada's chief public health officer, provided an update this afternoon.
12:05 p.m. Montreal day camps can open - but will they?
In a recent survey, almost 80 per cent of accredited Montreal day camps said they would not open unless financial help is forthcoming, an industry association says.
In order to enforce social distancing, the government has instructed camps to lower the ratio of campers to counsellors, which could increase salary costs by at least 30 to 50 per cent.
Read our full story, by Katherine Wilton.
11:40 a.m. Quebec reports 614 new cases, 70 more deaths
Quebec has recorded 614 new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to 48,598, the province announced this morning.
There were 70 new deaths reported. The death toll is now 4,139.
11:35 a.m. Quebec wants soldiers to continue in long-term care centres, Trudeau says
At his press conference this morning, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said Quebec and Ontario have asked for Armed Forces personnel to remain at long-term care centres for now.
Ottawa has agreed to the request, he said. There was no word on how long the soldiers will remain.
Trudeau also said:
Canada has signed a contract with General Motors to produce 10 million face masks. He says the masks are already being manufactured.
The federal government will finance up to 700 youth jobs in the agriculture industry to help farmers and students.
Armed Forces personnel have reported "extremely troubling observations" about several long-term care facilities in Ontario. Trudeau does not provide details but says he has discussed the matter with Ontario Premier Doug Ford.
Asylum seekers working in Quebec long-term care centres are doing important work. He was responding to a question about Premier François Legault's suggestion yesterday that some of them should be accepted as immigrants. Trudeau says Ottawa is looking at fast-tracking such workers.
It makes sense that political parties, including his Liberal Party, can receive emergency wage subsidies. Trudeau said party workers include translators, receptionists, accountants and other types of workers who deserve help as much as people who work in other sectors. The Bloc Québécois has said political parties should not receive the subsidy.
10:50 a.m. Quebec ombudsperson to investigate seniors' residences
In a press release this morning, Quebec's ombudsperson Marie Rinfret said her office is launching "an impartial and independent investigation" into seniors' residences, where the vast majority of Quebec's COVID-19 deaths have occurred.
She said her office is "very concerned about the situation of the elderly in many residences and is worried about the measures to ensure their safety and well-being. The proliferation of deaths and sites of contamination have brought alarming findings into focus concerning the ability of residences to deal with pandemics when even basic care is not always a guarantee."
The investigation will "shed light on the government's and the health network's response to the COVID-19 crisis in residences for seniors.
"The investigation will make it possible to identify:
The required improvements in residences for seniors based on the events of the crisis and known pre-pandemic shortcomings;
The measures to put in place to better handle future pandemics or any other similar crisis."
10:40 a.m. 'Fatalism effect': People who overestimate spread are less likely to follow rules People who vastly overestimate the infectiousness of COVID-19 are less likely to follow public health guidelines, argues a new paper from British and American economists.
Read our full story.
10:35 a.m. Transparent masks made to assist deaf, hard-of-hearing
An Ontario couple have developed a mask with a see-through window that covers the mouth, allowing those who rely on lip-reading to continue communicating with others without sacrificing safety.
Read our full story
10:30 a.m. Mixed messages in Ontario
Some have criticized Quebec briefings, suggesting public health authorities should hold separate ones from politicians. The idea being that health officials must remain independent and avoid becoming politicized.
But Quebec's way of doing things does avoid what happened in Ontario yesterday when politicians and public health provided contradictory advice.
WATCH: Do Ontario's public health officials and govt. leaders have a communications problem?
Here are their messages on:
-If Mother's Day weekend had an impact on recent numbers.
-What those at Trinity Bellwoods crowd should do now. #onpoli #covid19
- NEWSTALK1010 (@NEWSTALK1010) May 25, 2020
10 a.m. Quebecers among least likely to believe most conspiracy theories
This is a follow-up to the previous item about the poll.
Though most Quebecers think governments are keeping secrets, the same survey found they're among the least likely to believe other conspiracy theories.
Below is a chart I grabbed from the poll, with Quebec responses highlighted.
(Numbers in red indicate a significantly lower proportion than that of other respondents. Green indicates a higher proportion.)
9:55 a.m. Half of Canadians think governments deliberately hiding information, poll finds
Half of Canadians believe they're not getting the whole truth from their governments about COVID-19, a new poll suggests, and some also believe conspiracy theories about where the novel coronavirus began.
The misgivings were greatest in Quebec, where 60 per cent of those polled believe governments are keeping secrets about the virus.
Read our full story
9:45 a.m. Military reports 36 cases in members working in nursing homes
Thirty-six members of the Canadian Forces working in long-term care homes in Quebec and Ontario have become sick with COVID-19, up from 28 less than a week ago.
Read our full story
9:40 a.m. Video: Montrealers go shopping
Many Montreal stores reopened yesterday for the first time in more than two months. Here's what some shoppers and store workers told us.
9:30 a.m. Canada has received fraction of needed protective equipment
From The Canadian Press:
OTTAWA - The federal government will update Canadians today on the results of the mad scramble to procure personal protective equipment - just as demand is poised to skyrocket with more people returning to work and public health officials preparing for a potential second wave of COVID-19 infections.
As of May 19, data posted by Public Services and Procurement Canada showed only a fraction of the millions of gloves, masks, face shields, ventilators and litres of hand sanitizer ordered by the federal government had so far been received.
For example, of 29,570 ventilators ordered, only 203 had been received.
When it comes to the coveted N95 respirator mask that's the standard-issue covering for the heath-care profession, upwards of 104 million have been ordered but just less than 12 million received and, of those, 9.8 million didn't meet Canadian standards.
The equipment has been in high demand worldwide, with every country competing for scarce supplies from a limited number of suppliers, mostly in China. In what's been described as a "wild west" battle, some confirmed orders have been snatched out from under Canada's nose by other countries willing to pay more.
Even so, officials argue that the federal government has so far been able to deliver everything that the provinces and territories have requested.
However, the demand is expected to go up now that provinces are easing up on the restrictions imposed in mid-March to curb the spread of the deadly coronavirus that causes COVID-19.
9:20 a.m. Quebecers confident they'll weather crisis, poll suggests
Despite the fact their province has the highest COVID-19 death toll in the country, Quebecers seem less worried about contracting the disease, are feeling less stressed during their confinement and think they are in better mental health than other Canadians, a new poll suggests.
Read our full story
9:15 a.m. Here's where you can get tested in Montreal today
Montrealers can be tested at free screening clinics across the island.
They are for people who 1) have symptoms or 2) don't have symptoms but have been in close contact with someone who has received a positive COVID-19 test result.
Today, nine testing centres are available across Montreal Island
Note some of the clinics require appointments.
9 a.m. Across Canada, almost 86,000 cases, 6,600 deaths
As of 4 a.m., there were 85,711 COVID-19 cases and 6,545 deaths in Canada. A total of 44,651 people have recovered.
Here's the breakdown by province and territory.
Quebec: 47,984 (4,069 deaths, 14,654 resolved)
Ontario: 25,904 (2,102 deaths, 19,698 resolved)
Alberta: 6,879 (138 deaths, 5,979 resolved)
British Columbia: 2,530 (161 deaths, 2,102 resolved)
Nova Scotia: 1,051 (58 deaths, 974 resolved)
Saskatchewan: 634 (7 deaths, 546 resolved)
Manitoba: 281 (7 deaths, 268 resolved), 11 presumptive
Newfoundland and Labrador: 260 (3 deaths, 254 resolved)
New Brunswick: 121 (120 resolved)
Prince Edward Island: 27 (27 resolved)
Repatriated Canadians: 13 (13 resolved)
Yukon: 11 (11 resolved)
Northwest Territories: 5 (5 resolved)
Nunavut: No confirmed cases
8:30 a.m. What's open and closed in Montreal
We are constantly updating our list of
8:30 a.m. Nightly newsletter
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here:
ariga@postmedia.com
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
A timeline of the novel coronavirus in Quebec

