T he
search for a replacement for retired Chief Administrative Officer
Paul Fitzpatrick is down to two candidates with an announcement on
the successful applicant expected before the end of the month.
For sure, one of the two finalists is Norm Levac, general manager
of infrustructure and municipal works, while the other is said to be
Maureen Adams, the highly regarded general manager of finance.
Stephen Alexander, serving as acting CAO, did not apply for the job.
Levac may have the edge because of his lengthy municipal
experience, both here and in Ottawa, and fluency in both French and
English.
"If he is a candidate, he certainly knows the workings of the
city," said a councillor last week before being briefed this week on
the hiring process. "I would have no trouble giving him my vote."
At least two other councillors expressed a similar feeling when
asked if they could support Levac for the job.
Another said Levac would be a good choice but wanted to know (this
was two weeks ago) the name of the second candidate.
One source, who declined to name the candidates, said regardless of
which one gets the job the city will have a top notch person who
knows the municipality.
The prevailing feeling around the council table is that promoting
from within trumps going outside.
This time around city council saved the usual $30,000-$40,000
headhunter's fee by giving the responsibility to a hiring committee
made up of councillors Denis Thibault, Denis Carr, Glen Grant, Mayor
Bob Kilger and Elaine MacDonald.
There was no shortage of applicants for city hall's top paying job.
The committee had 90 applicants to sort through at its first
meeting.
So, if you are a betting person, put money on Levac to become the
sixth CAO.
My crystal ball says he will be the next CAO.
A word of caution, however: I also said the Blue Jays would win
their AL division, that the Leafs would make the playoffs and that
Willard Romney would be the next president.
TRIVIA
This part of old Cornwall Township was called Smithville. It's
demise in 1958 was not connected to the building of the Seaway.
Where was Smithville?
Answer to last week's trivia - Sept. 5, 1944. The quake centred
just 40 miles from the city struck just after midnight.
It registered as a magnitude 5.8 on the Richter scale. It was
followed by several sharp aftershocks and slight tremours were felt
for several days.
Damage was estimated at $1 million. Today, it would be in the
millions. So badly damaged was CCVS, the school was closed for a
week. An estimated 1,000 chimneys were destroyed. Every store window
on Pitt Street was broken. One report said people rushed out of
their homes and, thinking it was the end of the world, were praying
in the streets.
In Massena, hundreds of residents feared that it was a German
attack on the Alcoa plant.
Two years later to the day the city was hit with a less powerful
quake.
THIS TIME, NO COMEBACK
Cornwall Sports Hall of Famer Art Murphy (football) home from
hospital recovering from surgery to repair a broken hip. He's taking
physio and making progress. But says Art, referring to some of his
football injuries, "This time, there won't be a comeback."
BIG SPENDERS
The New Democratic Party solution to the looming financial wind
storm -spend more money.
A good way to turn a category 1 financial hurricane into a category
3 financial storm.
STILL A LOT OF MONEY
A reasonable case can be made that the $100,000 starting point for
the provincial sunshine list is outdated because of inflation and
that the bar should be raised. However, since the Harris government
brought in the list the income level for hardworking folks at the
other end of the food chain and those on fixed incomes has barely
budged. A six-figure salary, especially in this part of the
province, is still a much better than average income.
HOLDING PATTERN
The longest running test pattern in television history just might
be the Ontario legislative channel which covers the legislature ...
when it is in session. And just a thought, what do all those people
paid to keep the legislature running do when it has been shutdown
for months?
HIGH PROFILE CASE
Former Cornwall lawyer Diane Lahaie has been an Ontario Court
Justice for less than a year but is involved in a high profile
Ottawa court case involving a restaurant owner found guilty of
criminal libel after carrying out a smear campaign against a
customer who wrote a critical review of the ByWard Market eatery on
the internet. The New York Times and Dr. Phil have mentioned the
case. The Crown has asked for a 90-day jail sentence. A decision on
sentence was to be made Friday.
RYAN TURNS 32
Hollywood heart-throb Ryan Gosling, who calls Cornwall his
hometown, turned 32 on Monday. A great video has been uncovered in
somebody's garage of a 10-year-old Gosling and his sister Mandi
performing during a talent show at Aultsville Hall. Talk about
talent ... wow!
BAD HABITS PAY
If everybody stopped smoking, drinking and gambling today, the
provincial goverment - deprived of billions of dollars in sin taxes
-would be hanging out the bankruptcy sign on the front door of
Queen's Park. True, there would be some savings in health-care costs
but they would take years to kick in. But on the flip side, people
would live longer putting an even bigger strain on pension plans.
IN THE REAR-VIEW MIRROR
Lebano's Store at Fourth and Amelia streets, a favourite hangout
for the 1950s and 1960s Cornwall Collegiate crowd ... Kennedy's Soda
Bar on Pitt, next to the old police station ... Lawn's Pool Hall at
First and Pitt streets ... Central Billiards on Pitt next to the
LCBO ... Modern Billiards on Third Street West between Pitt and
Adolphus ... the old A and P store (manager Harold Smith) on Pitt
Street ...
VOICE FROM THE PAST
Former Standard-Freeholder sports editor Dave Shoihet checks in
with Coffee Break. Now 74, he lives in Ottawa and has fond memories
of his time in Cornwall before moving to the Montreal Gazette where
he toiled under the legendary Red Fisher.
CARE'S GREAT, FOOD ISN'T
A South Stormont resident who spent 30 days as a "guest" of
Cornwall Community Hospital after breaking a hip is back home
singing the praises of the staff that cared for her. However, she
can't same the say about the food. She called it slightly tastier
than cardboard. One of the problems is that in budget-cutting, the
food is pre-cooked in Ottawa and trucked to Cornwall. "I'm sure they
nuked the toast after making it in Ottawa," she said.
IF THE PRICE IS RIGHT
The need for the city to cut off-peak ice rental rates at the
Benson Centre to attract clients puts a twist to the Field of Dreams
line "If you build it, he will come." In the case of the
multi-million B Centre, it is "If you build it, they will come ...
if the price is right."
CREDIT: CLAUDE MCINTOSH

