A vigorous cold front has moved over Montreal, Environment Canada says, and with that could come snow squalls.
Weather changes quickly in these conditions, the federal meteorological agency says, "from clear skies to heavy snow within just a few kilometres." The watch also covers Châteauguay, Laval and Longueuil.
The late-morning temperature of 1 C over Montreal Island was expected to dive to minus-22 C with a windchill of minus-32 C overnight.
Meanwhile in the Ottawa region, according to the Twitter feed of YOW_Weather, "an intense cold front could bring some thundersnow( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/frostquakes-and-thundersnow-absurd-winter-weather-beyond-the-polar-vortex ) to the Ottawa region around noon, just before the temperature drops dramatically. The last time the airport reported thundersnow was Feb. 12, 1997."
A winter storm that will dump at least 30 centimetres of snow is expected to break over Quebec beginning Saturday, and the wallop is expected to be particularly brutal along the St. Lawrence Valley.
In its weather forecast posted Tuesday night, the MétéoMédia weather network predicts 40 cm of snow will fall on Montreal and Quebec City by Sunday, while nearly 50 cm will accumulate farther east.
MétéoMédia warns also that the snowfall could be accompanied by high winds that would create blizzard conditions. And temperatures are expected to remain frigid, staying well below -10 C.
The closest the forecast gets to a silver lining is the prediction that, should the storm front sweep through the province a little farther to the south, the minimum accumulation of snow would be 20 cm rather than 30.
Environment Canada, meanwhile, is forecasting snow for the region late Saturday and on Sunday with a predicted high of -13 C.
Related
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )
Blizzard proof! A spadeful of tips for safe snow shovelling( https://montrealgazette.com/news/blizzard-proof-a-spadeful-of-tips-for-safe-snow-shovelling )
Montreal winter-driving guide: How to avoid sliding, sliding ... bang!( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang )

