This year, we have had rain practically every day throughout November and December, a time of the year when we should be seeing some snow
No snow for Christmas? And a temperature of 7 C? Maybe a high of 12? This cannot be happening.
What are holidays without snow? They're just ordinary, boring days, without magic or joy. The sight of a snow-covered street or park is uplifting; rain is depressing. True, we had a Christmas Day without snow in 2006 - the meteorologists keep reminding me.
Here in Montreal, people are gloomily going through the last motions of gift buying, trying to avoid the puddles on the sidewalks, their paper gift bags tearing under the rain, their heads bowed down under their umbrellas.
And we're all confused about our footwear: The unseasonal temperatures have kept our snow boots in the closet, collecting dust instead of the white stuff. Wellies would be more appropriate but most people here don't own any.
This year, we have had rain practically every day throughout November and December. According to Environment Canada, this month is breaking the record for the warmest December.
Don't get me wrong: I am no fan of Old Man Winter. I detest the face-freezing, biting cold. I don't ski, I don't skate. But snow, snow I love. The beauty of which I blissfully admire from my downtown apartment, close to public transit - I'm spared all the miseries linked to snow. I haven't seen a shovel for years, and I never have to go through the back-breaking efforts of trying to free my car from a snow bank.
This season, on the bus, people lose themselves in their smartphones, their dripping umbrellas between their legs, their trip rhythmed by the repetitive sound of the bus's giant windshield wipers. A far cry from the magic of seasons past, when strangers wished the driver a Merry Christmas as they stomped the snow from their feet.
The sellers of ski equipment, let alone the ski-slopes operators, are desperate. So are millions of parents, who fear their kids will spend the whole holiday period inside, huddled over their video games instead of building snow castles in the fresh, healthy winter air.
Sometimes - a fleeting Christmas miracle: We see snowflakes dancing in the air. But why must they melt as soon as they touch the ground?
No, this is not real snow: The authentic stuff stays, builds, and leaves glorious layers of soft white meringue.
"Wishing you a merry brown Christmas," some cynics say. Because of its distasteful associations, brown is not a lovely colour. In France, this word - - has been virtually erased from the vocabulary. No self-respecting salesperson will ever sell you "a brown jacket." They will refer to "" ( is a nice word, meaning "chestnut").
The media are trying to put a positive spin on this sad phenomenon of snowlessness. They're talking of a "green Christmas," "." But let's stop kidding ourselves. There's nothing green in Montreal (or in the country, for that matter). The only green in sight is the pines, which, at this time of year, should be weighed down with piles of snow gleaming under the bright happy sun of a real Canadian winter.
Is this the beginning of the effects of climate change? Will Montreal become like Vancouver, a glorious city in summertime whose beautiful mountains disappear in November under low skies and constant rain?
But then, would the St. Lawrence Valley become as lush as the Okanagan, and yield a cornucopia of sweet fruits and gorgeous wines?
That sounds lovely - but don't fool yourself. Nothing beats snow at Christmas.

