Just to the north of the runways of Montreal's Trudeau International Airport, a gaggle of birders squeeze their way between towering cattails and leafy green reeds on an autumn Sunday to emerge upon an unexpected oasis, the Canadian equivalent of a waterhole in the African savanna.
Mallards and Canada geese by the dozen paddle through a vast pond in the Ipex Wetland as great egrets draped in frocks of glaring white spear ill-fated frogs at the shoreline. Green herons squabble over a plump dragonfly while on the mud flats, spotted sandpipers, killdeers and semipalmated plovers keep a wary eye on the Cooper's hawk surveying breakfast options from the branches of a dead tree.
The scene is all the more incongruous for its location: the wetland is perched precariously in the southern sector of a high-tech industrial park in the St-Laurent borough known as Technoparc Montréal, where 100 businesses with 7,000 employees have carved out space from forest and swamp over the last 30 years. The wetland got its unofficial name because it's located right next to Ipex, an international firm that builds plastic piping. The trail to the marsh runs alongside the firm's chain link fence.
The wild fringes of the Technoparc have become one of the city's premiere viewing spots because of its combination of wetlands, open fields and forests where birds can feed and breed in safety. In the space of a year, birders there have recorded 176 of the 250 bird species( https://montrealgazette.com/news/environmentalists-bird-enthusiasts-flock-to-technoparc-to-raise-awareness ) that live in Montreal, or use it as a stopover point on their north-south migrations, making it the most varied bird habitat in the city. Even in the depths of winter, the forests play home to hawks, owls and several non-migratory species.
But the wetlands are also emblematic of the uneasy balance and ongoing battle between commercial development and ecological preservation. None of the land within the Technoparc is protected, and most is mortgaged and up for sale.
Even in little known oases like the Technoparc, unregulated development poses a constant threat. Developers paid by the city put in a road and dike in 2017 that reduced the size of Montreal's largest wetlands by more than half.
"You should have seen this place in 2016," says professional ornithologist Joël Coutu, who leads regular bird-watching tours through the area. "It was like the Everglades."
Environmentalist received some happy news in late August with the announcement that Montreal's airport authority is turning 19 hectares of federal forest and marshland adjacent to the Technoparc, north of the airport and to the east of Golf Dorval, into a protected ecological park( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/new-ecological-park-to-be-created-north-of-montreals-trudeau-airport ). But ecologists say the fight to preserve the Technoparc lands is still crucial.
"You can see there are far fewer birds than there were just two or three years ago," says ornithologist Joël Coutu, who leads regular birdwatching tours through the Technoparc area.
The natural bounty of the site lies in contrast to the darker side of the big picture: the populations of one-quarter of Canada's bird species are on the decline, with several in free fall. Nimble flyers like chimney swifts and shore swallows that feed on insects have seen their numbers drop by more than 95 per cent since the 1970s, victims to pesticides, chemical pollution and a loss of habitat. In cities like Montreal, the dearth of chimneys and dead trees, slowly eradicated by the inexorable forces of development, has contributed to their fall. As with many species, climate change is also playing a role.
The bird population in Canada and the United States has experienced a net loss of nearly 3 billion birds, or 29 per cent of its total, since 1970, according to a study published in Science magazine( https://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2019/09/18/science.aaw1313 ) in September. "This loss of bird abundance signals an urgent need to address threats to avert future avifaunal collapse," the authors wrote.
Tragedy for bird species is also troubling for humankind, because their well-being is directly linked to our own. Healthy natural environments for birds means human populations will experience less flooding and erosion issues, better filtering of groundwater, and an increase in property values. It also translates into more habitat for all forms of wildlife, and the opportunity for citizens to find serenity in nature.
"What is good for birds is good for us," wrote the authors of The State of Canada's Birds, an overview of the country's avian population published this summer by Environment and Climate Change Canada with the aid of all provinces and territories, on behalf of the North American Bird Conservation Initiative Canada (NABCI).
Birds have long served as bellwethers for the human environment, their more delicate constitutions warning of unseen toxins.
"I think a world unfit for birds is unfit for humans," said David Bird, professor emeritus of wildlife biology at McGill University and a former longtime bird columnist for the Montreal Gazette.
"They act as canaries in the coal mine, which is basically what they're doing right now. The world is going to hell in a handbasket, and unless you do something about it ... You lose your birds first, then you guys are next."
Cedar waxwing
Winner and loser species
"The avifauna of Montreal is in a constant state of flux," Bird notes, with some species emerging as winners and others as losers.
The 2019 State of Canada's Birds Survey( http://nabci.net/wp-content/uploads/39-004-Canada-State-of-Birds_EN_WEB-1.pdf ), which compared today's bird populations with those of 70 years ago, found one-quarter of the country's 449 species were declining rapidly, while another quarter were on the upswing and the rest holding steady.
Among the biggest winners were geese, waterfowl and duck species, buoyed by the efforts of ecological groups and hunting organizations that raised millions for wetland conservation projects. Raptors like peregrine falcons, Cooper's hawks, merlins and bald eagles, once on the brink of extinction because the pesticide DDT thinned their eggshells, are up 110 per cent since the 1970s thanks to international pesticide bans, and the birds' ability to adapt to urban milieus.
Peregrine falcon spotted at River's Edge Community Church in N.D.G. in 2018.
"Peregrine falcons and others learned to use Montreal's skyscrapers like cliff faces," Bird said. They also benefited from an abundance of pigeons and other urban delicacies to prey on, including back yard feeder birds like sparrows, northern cardinals and woodpeckers that have also seen a resurgence.
Canada's wetland birds, nesting seabirds and forest birds have stayed mostly stable. But grassland species like meadowlarks and Swainson's hawks have suffered a drop of 300 million birds since 1970 as agriculture overwhelms their habitats here and abroad. Shorebirds that depend on coastal areas and inland wetlands for breeding and wintering have seen their numbers drop by 40 per cent.
"The question is often just about space," said Marie-Anne Hudson, co-author of the State of Canada's Birds Survey and a senior bird surveys biologist with the Canadian Wildlife Service at Environment and Climate Change Canada.
"We humans love our coastlines, at the risk of our shorebirds," many of which are travelling thousands of miles between the Arctic and South America, and need to eat regularly to maintain muscle and fat. "We're losing habitat to shoreline development, and there are ways that you can mitigate that, like setting aside the land, and carefully managing beaches so that shorebirds can reach them during this really brief window."
There are also little things that can be done that people don't think about, Hudson notes, like not letting their dogs run on beaches during migration periods "and scaring the crap out of all of these shorebirds."
Canadian seabirds - including species that nest in Canada or elsewhere and rely on our waters to feed - are in crisis worldwide, with 95 per cent considered at risk due to ingesting plastics, habitat loss and the destruction of bird colonies wrought by more frequent storms.
Aerial insectivores - birds that capture insects while in flight - have taken the hardest hit, mirroring the losses suffered by birds of prey in the 1950s.
The agile barn swallows and swifts that once flitted and swooped through Montreal's skies are a rarity now in eastern North America, for reasons not entirely understood. Part of the cause may be a marked decline in insect populations, with some studies estimating the overall global biomass of insects has dropped 40 per cent due to pesticide use.
A Great Grey Owl is a rare sighting in the Montreal area.
The causes
The No. 1 reason for falling bird populations is habitat loss. The trend toward monoculture food crops that drain marshes and uproot forests removes crucial feeding and nesting sites.
Urban development means fewer grasslands, forests, shorelines and wetlands in which to live, or stop over for a life-sustaining rest and food before continuing on a migratory journey. Montreal's Nuns' Island was once one of the best owl sites in the province, with half a dozen varieties visible there. Condo development that left no forest uprooted put an end to that.
Until recently in Montreal's Technoparc, birders would see 15 or 16 egrets and herons at the same time. In 2017, Technoparc Montréal, the city-funded non-profit agency responsible for attracting developers, put in a dike and a road that shrunk the marshes. Now, just one or two herons or egrets are typically spotted in the same area. The agency was disbanded by the city( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/technoparc-montreal-shakeup-brings-hope-to-environmentalists ) last year over concerns of mismanagement.
"You can see there are far fewer birds than there were just two or three years ago," Coutu said.
A station of the coming REM train line is being installed next door, causing further disturbance, although developers did agree to tunnel under the wetlands to preserve them.
In Montreal and throughout Canada, the rebirth of raptors like peregrine falcons and Cooper's hawks has come at the expense of the American Kestrel, which is North America's smallest falcon and prey to the larger birds.
Agriculture producers have been winning the pesticide war on insects, leaving less food for birds, or poisoning them. A recent study published by the journal Science showed migratory birds like the white-crowned sparrow became anorexic after eating seeds laced with neonicotinoids( https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/09/common-pesticide-makes-migrating-birds-anorexic ), an agricultural pesticide commonly linked to the death of bees. Since many of Canada's birds migrate south, issues in stopover spots or nesting areas in the United States, Mexico and South America resonate here.
"Look at the Amazon," Bird said, referring to the widespread fires decimating forests and agricultural fields in South America. "If we destroy the habitat down there, it's the same effect as destroying it up here."
Climate change has also been wreaking havoc. Shifts in temperatures mean birds may arrive only to find the insects they normally feed on have not yet appeared. Increased wildfires, drought and sea levels contribute to a loss of habitat. A rise in the number and severity of storms means more migrating birds are killed en route, and shorebirds are seeing their colonies wiped out. Single-use plastics and chemical and oil spills are another hazard.
A green heron in the Technoparc wetland.
Reasons for hope
Coutu gazes at the great egrets and the imposing great blue herons, the Cooper's hawks and merlins flying over the marshlands in the centre of Montreal and sees a resurgence.
"These birds are all top predators - they're at the top of the food chain. If they can survive here, things are in good shape."
The Technoparc region is home to six birds of prey, including the red-tailed and red-shouldered hawks and the Northern Harrier. In the fall, six species of owls nest in the region, the only place in Quebec where you can spot so many species of the reclusive bird in one day. Waterfowl are abundant, signs that wide-scale conservation efforts like the North American Waterfowl Management Plan started in 1986, which has protected 80,000 square kilometres of Canadian wetlands and surrounding lands, can work.
Sightings in the Technoparc area of the at-risk least bittern, one of the world's smallest species of herons, and the endangered wood thrush could also improve chances the area will be protected.
"I'm not against development," Coutu said. "I understand there is an economic need. But I feel it can be done in a more ecological way, by building new industries near other existing industries, and not in the middle of a wetland."
Recent news about the ecological park being created nearby, and that Montreal is working to build the largest urban park in Canada,( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-announces-plan-to-build-montreals-largest-urban-park ) called the Great Western Park, protecting 3,000 hectares of green space, means more habitat.
Here at home, citizens can help by restricting the movements of house cats, which kill millions of birds every year, and bird-proofing their windows to limit deadly collisions.
The new Champlain Bridge is using blue and green lights during migratory periods to lessen bird collisions.
Hudson put Feather Friendly Tape( https://www.featherfriendly.com/feather-friendly-solution-for-do-it-yourself-residential-applications/ )on her windows, a product made in Toronto that has small white dots spaced a couple inches apart, to deter birds. She also suggests window companies apply an ultra-violet film invisible to humans but visible to birds to their windows, and creating FLAP programs (Fatal Light Awareness Programs) that exist in cities like Toronto to rescue birds that have collided with the windows of buildings. Even the new Champlain Bridge is using blue and green lights( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/theyve-turned-on-the-lights-on-montreals-new-champlain-bridge ) as opposed to white during migratory periods to lessen bird collisions.
Above all, Hudson recommends citizens act as lobbyists, writing directly to companies that benefit from bird-threatening measures, like using habitat-destroying palm oil in their products, to say they will no longer buy their products unless they change.
"If enough of us do that, I'm hoping that they'll think with their dollars and say 'Okay, if we change this small part of our manufacturing process, then we can regain these customers.' "
Bird recommends buying "bird-friendly" coffee, made by growers who leave natural spaces for birds to nest in their plantations. Promoting green growth in back yards and putting up bird feeders are things people can do immediately, and see the impact, even right outside their windows.
"I just can't imagine being in a world where the only birds I'm going to see in my back yard are starlings and gulls and house sparrows," Bird said.
"All the bird populations are an important part of our culture and an important part of our environment. And if things aren't good for them, they're not going to be good for us."
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
Related
Top birdwatching spots chosen by award-winning photographer( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/top-7-birdwatching-spots-in-montreal-chosen-by-an-award-winning-photographer )
Many of Canada's bird populations in deep decline: report( http://www.montrealgazette.com/news/metro/many+canada+bird+populations+deep+decline+report+says/6848930/story.html )
A Bird's eye view of Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/a-birds-eye-view-of-montreal )
Wetlands are worth saving( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-technoparc-wetlands-are-worth-saving?fbclid=IwAR06-X-WzyPJvzG93z5CTU818zcwuWq7IMYNjRfYK8SlkVr6-GQ0t1F9xpo )
Morgan Arboretum
MONTREAL'S BEST BIRDWATCHING SPOTS
Technoparc Montréal - Eco-Campus 170
Parc Nature de la Pointe-aux-Prairies 170
Aéroports de Montréal wetlands, located between Technoparc and airport 155
McGill Bird Observatory 155
Montreal Botanical Gardens 149
Parc Nature de l'Île-de-la-Visitation 132
Morgan Arboretum 121
Mount Royal 106
Bois-de-Liesse Nature Park 103
L'Anse-à-l'Orme Nature Park 79
Number of species spotted at each site; compiled by ornithologist Joël Coutu.
Merlin
TOP 10 BIRDS IN MONTREAL ON THE RISE
Pileated woodpecker
Yellow-bellied sapsucker
Eastern screech-owl
Northern cardinal
Turkey vulture
Cooper's hawk
Wild turkey
Merlin
Canada goose
Common raven
ON THE DECLINE
Upland sandpiper
Eastern meadowlark
Ring-billed gull
Evening grosbeak
Northern pintail
Gray partridge
Blue-winged teal
Purple martin
Bank swallow
Swainson's thrush
Source: Denis Lepage, Data and Web Site Management, Quebec Breeding Bird Atlas, 2010-2014 survey
Killdeer
FOR MORE ON BIRDS
Bird Protection Quebec( http://pqspb.org/bpqpoq/ ): Among the oldest birding clubs in Canada, it offers free guided trips in Montreal and the Montreal region, and a host of resources on its website.
e-Bird Quebec( https://ebird.org/qc/subnational2/CA-QC-MR?yr=all ): A listing of the latest bird sightings in Montreal and Quebec in an online, real-time bird checklist. Run by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, National Audubon Society:
Technoparc Oiseaux( http://facebook.com/groups/TechnoparcOiseaux/ ): A Facebook page run by ornithologist Joël Coutu, it's updated several times a day by dedicated birders who share their photos of the day's discoveries.
Ask Dr. Bird( http://askprofessorbird.com ): Created by David Bird, professor emeritus of wildlife biology at McGill University and author of several birding books, this website offers answers to frequently asked questions, tips on birding and how to attract birds to backyard feeders. It welcomes questions from readers.
Birding Pal( http://birdingpal.org/pq.htm ): A website that connects birders across Quebec in order to go birdwatching together.
Nature Expert( http://nature-expert.ca ): Montreal retail store that focuses largely on birding accessories like bird feeders and binoculars for bird hobbyists.
FLAP Canada( http://flap.org ): The Fatal Light Awareness Program, developed in Toronto in 1993, is devoted to saving birds injured in collisions with buildings. It has saved tens of thousands of birds and released them into the wild.



