Within 48 hours of the provincial government shutting down all non-essential stores across the province in March, the folks at Aux 33 Tours had created a full-scale web store with close to 80,000 records for sale online. And reaction was swift and enthusiastic, with the Mont-Royal Ave. E. store, one of the city's leading vinyl retailers, receiving a flood of orders.
Aux 33 Tours, which didn't sell online before the COVID-19 crisis, uses several different delivery methods, including Canada Post for faraway deliveries and drivers here in Montreal who are delivering around 100 packages around the city every day.
Stores in Montreal will be allowed to reopen May 25 under Premier François Legault's plan, but Aux 33 Tours owner Pierre Markotanyos doesn't think he'll open that day and is unsure when he'll reopen his doors.
"My greatest fear is: What if we open up and we're open for two or three weeks and one of my staff gets COVID and I have to retrace the customers who've come into the store in the last three days and tell them to quarantine themselves? Then I'll have to shut down and disinfect the whole store," said Markotanyos.
"I don't feel comfortable opening the store if I don't feel I can protect my employees and protect my customers."
Many book and record stores in Montreal have, like Aux 33 Tours, branched out into online sales to satisfy customers while the bricks-and-mortar stores are closed due to government regulations.
Venerable McGill Ghetto used-book emporium The Word has elicited much positive reaction to its new online sales presence At the beginning of the crisis, the store was offering a surprise book box where the customer would receive books selected by staff at The Word. They put it on hold after a couple of weeks because it was complicated to manage, but say it will be back shortly. They do also still offer a surprise book option and store manager Brendan King-Edwards says it is popular with people who want to send a present to someone they're unable to see right now because of confinement rules.
King-Edwards says The Word will reopen May 25 and will continue selling online.
"If we're being realistic, people are going to be spending more time at home and they're not going to necessarily want to go out and go shopping," said King-Edwards. "It's not ideal for us because we're a historic location and one of the things people love about us is actually coming to the location."
The Drawn & Quarterly bookstore on Bernard St. in Mile End also began online sales and delivery at the start of the COVID-19 crisis. The folks at Drawn & Quarterly are not sure if the store will re-open May 25.
Encore Books & Records on Sherbrooke St. W. in N.D.G. took an innovative approach to selling books and records during the pandemic.
"Right now we're delivering in N.D.G. once a week and we're taking orders on Facebook," said Encore owner Sean Madden. "What we're doing is putting up pictures of our sections and people can browse the pictures online and then they tell us which book from which picture number. It's basically a community service."
Madden is not sure if Encore will reopen May 25.
bkelly@postmedia.com( mailto:bkelly@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz
Related
Montreal Gazette cartoonist Boris to read at Drawn & Quarterly
Getting the word out about children's literature in Montreal
Montreal record shops petition Quebec to change store hours bylaw
Mile End record stores facing steep fines for staying open late
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 8
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette

