The usual tests to gauge a couple's compatibility look at each partner's attitude toward big issues such as time, money and fidelity. Air conditioning never comes up. Yet this time of year, especially during a heat wave in a city that gets as muggy as Montreal, many couples quarrel about air conditioning. Some like it hot, and others - well - not so much.
Local marriage and family therapist Tom Caplan says that in his 32 years in the field, the air-conditioning issue has occasionally come up. Usually, Caplan says, it's a problem couples are able to resolve in a reasonable amount of time. But sometimes, he said, the argument is about more than air conditioning. "It might be a metaphor about problem-solving and negotiation," he said.
Meghan Stevenson estimates that, in warm weather, she and her partner, Matthew Demetriou, argue two to three times a week about air conditioning. "I hate being hot and uncomfortable. I need the AC to sleep and to live," said Stevenson, 31, an executive assistant.
The couple's cottage in Brossard has central air conditioning. If it was up to Demetriou, 33, an elevator mechanic, he would never use the system, even on the hottest days. "I like real air, not fake air. We have six of months of winter, and we complain about the cold. I want and love the heat," he said.
Mostly, Stevenson gets her way. Sometimes, when she wakes up at night, she goes downstairs and adjusts the air-conditioning settings so that the house is even colder.
Demetriou copes by bundling up. "I cover my face and my body. I don't see any light," he said.
Brian Azimov, 31, and Camille Traill, 29, start squabbling about air conditioning well before the first heat wave. During cooler weather, the couple, who have been married four years, stores their air conditioner in a locker in the basement of their N.D.G. apartment. "When I decide it's time to bring the air conditioner up, I'm met with resistance. She says it's too soon," said Azimov, who works for the SAQ.
Traill, an operations manager, does not mind heat and humidity. What bothers her most about the air conditioner, which is installed in their bedroom window, is the noise. "It annoys me. I can't sleep through the night when it's on," she said.
Meghan Stevenson estimates that, in warm weather, she and her partner, Matthew Demetriou, argue two to three times a week about air conditioning. She hates "being hot and uncomfortable," while he says, "I want and love the heat."
Traill also has environmental concerns. "Running the air conditioner 24-7 is just wasteful. Everyone in the city is doing it. I think it's crazy," she said.
The couple's Siamese cat, Suai, shares Traill's aversion to air conditioning. "If the air conditioning is on, she meows, and then goes to sleep on the couch," Azimov said.
In some cases, the air-conditioning argument can go on for years. Christine and Wayne Ross have been married for 47 years. "Forty-seven glorious years," said Christine. However, the couple spent 25 summers arguing about air conditioning. Christine, who is 68, dislikes it; Wayne, 69, is a fan.
Originally from Montreal and now living in Edmonton, the couple used to live near the Atwater Market. "I was always turning the air conditioner off, and he was always turning it back on," Christine said. "She'd go to work and I'd put the AC on," Wayne said.
Things improved when, in 1997, the Rosses moved west. "There's no humidity in Edmonton," said Wayne. "Now the main thing we argue about is when I leave the back door open. She doesn't want bugs in the house," he said.
But the air-conditioning argument resurfaced this week when the Rosses were in town to visit relatives. Wayne found that the air conditioning at his sister-in-law's condominium in LaSalle was too strong. "At least this time I was fighting with my sister-in-law, not my wife," he joked.
Numerous studies indicate a link between hotter temperatures and aggression. Though sunny, warm days tend to improve our moods, hot sticky days make us feel cranky. There are biological reasons for our crankiness, including the effects of dehydration and lack of sleep, both common occurrences when the temperature climbs. These reasons help explain not only arguments about air conditioning, but also the increased honking that seems to occur in traffic during heat waves.
"We know that when people don't feel their best, they tend to be more defensive and to have less ability to manage negative emotions," Caplan said.
Caplan has also observed that in younger couples, men seem to prefer cool conditions, while women like it warmer. Those preferences, he said, often change with age. Women who experience hot flashes tend to want air conditioning. "Then there are older men who you see wearing sweaters on hot days," he said.
But Caplan says the prognosis is good for couples who bicker about air conditioning - as long as they are willing to negotiate. In fact, that's what he and his wife, who have been together 30 years, managed to do. "I sleep under the sheet; she sleeps under the comforter," he said. "Couples can also adjust the settings on their air conditioners. It's about some form of compromise," he said.
Azimov and Traill seem to have the right attitude. "When it comes to relationships, I don't focus on the minutiae," Azimov said. "When you find someone who tolerates you, you can the tolerate the air conditioning."

