Nordic skiing is experiencing a surge in popularity among
Ever since Norwegian-Canadian ski legend Jackrabbit Johannsen marked out the Maple Leaf Ski Trail north of Montreal in the 1930s, Canada has steadily increased rights-of-way through endless forests so Nordic skiers could kick and glide to their hearts' content. Cross-country skiing is now the fastest-growing winter sport in the country, as baby boomers take to its unbeatable cardiovascular benefits, its ability to burn calories and the innate and deep pleasure of flying through forests in midwinter. Not by accident is the Calgary-based Loki Ski Club named after the Norse god of fun and mischief. This is a work-hard, play-hard sport, with excellent trails within an hour or two of many of the country's city centres. Ontario Who would imagine that just 120 kilometres north of Toronto are some of Canada's best Nordic ski trails? The three H's: Hardwood Hills, Horseshoe Valley and Highlands Nordic have perfected the art of a well-made trail. Hardwood and Highlands make snow, and all three have rentals, day lodges, accommodation, instruction and Jackrabbit ski programs for kids. (Named after Johannsen, the program has taught thousands of Canadian kids how to ski.) Each of the three H's is reliable, with its own microclimate that produces white stuff even when fields nearby lie snowless.
Horseshoe Valley is where I cut my teeth Nordic skiing 30 years ago, and just the name brings back memories of amazing descents and long, corridor-like trails perfect for honing technique. It has a child-friendly cafeteria upstairs and is not nearly as pretentious as its alpine sister across the road.
Hardwood Hills, just 5 kilometres away, is a cross-country skier's dream. The trails are challenging: Blast down Waterfall and the Bowl for starters, then climb Stairway to Hell (I mean Heaven) and see if there's anything left of your lungs. This is a great place to people watch over lunch as skiers crowd into the cafeteria to discuss the day's best wax.
Highlands Nordic has another set of fantastic trails. While they aren't as extensive, at the top of the escarpment the view can't be beat. The S-shaped trails are cut wide for beginners, but can be great fun cornering. Highlands Nordic also has fantastic food -- everything is homemade, as if you'd wandered into someone's farm kitchen.
To the novice, Nordic skiing, with its proliferation of tight Lycra outfits, waxing lingo and equipment that can rival that of alpine gear in price, may seem intimidating. But this is a sport that goes back thousands of years, to when a couple of Scandinavians tied strips of wood to their feet, grabbed two branches and glided through the forests. Today, these "classic" skis have evolved into slim, lightweight numbers but are still used in the traditional manner of kicking and gliding in a parallel motion.
Skate skis came about when American Olympic skier Billy Koch realized he went a lot faster if he used a sideways skating motion instead of kicking. These skis use a different kind of track, as the path through the woods must be wide enough to accommodate a sideways glide. Ski areas should specify whether they provide classic or skating trails or both.
A little farther but worth it are the trails on the beautiful Bruce Peninsula, about 2½ hours north of Toronto.
The Sawmill Trails in Hepworth are 10 kilometres of pure magic (skating and classic). Here you can fly down The Chute, Freefall or Double-By-Pass, or climb Heart Attack Hill.
Near the town of Wiarton, the Colpoys Bay route follows old wagon and logging trails. It is an excellent starter route, but provides no shelter so pack extra clothes, food, water and a map.
On the Lake Huron side of the peninsula, the stunning 15-km Red Bay wilderness trail offers plenty of dips and doodles.
In Arrowhead Provincial Park, three hours north of Toronto, the volunteers of the Arrowhead Nordic Ski Club have resurrected the Muskoka Loppet, which was once Southern Ontario's premier Nordic race/tour. After years off the calendar, this 30-km classic event (4 km for kids) returns on Jan. 12. British Columbia If there is snow (and there isn't any yet), Hollyburn Ridge in Cypress Provincial Park, just 40 mintues from Vancouver, has 35 kilometres of skate and classic trails including a number of lit trails for night skiing. The three best things about this place are its location, the quality of the trails and the 100 years of skiing history packed into the beautiful old walls of its Hollyburn Lodge.
Manning Provincial Park is a mountain wonderland with 32 km of trails (skating and classic), just three hours east of Vancouver. The best way to go to Manning is with a ski package from Vancouver's Sigge's Sports Villa. Why worry about navigating mountain passes in a lone automobile when there's a luxury bus heading there every Sunday from Vancouver? And everyone on Sigge's staff knows how to pour wine and serve cheese on the bus for the trip home.
Sigge's also sends buses every other Saturday to the Lost Lake trails in Whistler. These trails are at their best in January and February, so don't miss the Lost Lake Shuffle Jan. 18, a four-hour enduro-relay, and the Fairmont-Chateau Whistler Cup on Feb. 9 that offers 15- or 30-km race/tours.
To get away from the frenzy of the mountain, put on your skinny skis and start up at the 8-km Lost Lake Loop, switch to Cedar Way, and then Upper Fairways. It's a couple of kilometres of climbing, but worth the lactic acid. The view -- you are on the edge of Blackcomb -- is spectacular. Alberta There are a number of excellent, accessible trails in Banff. Access Spray Trails (skating and classic) behind the Banff Springs Hotel Conference Centre. After 5 km of varied terrain, there is a turn-off heading back to Banff. If you go straight for 4 km, you meet Goat's Creek Trail (an 18-km classic), which leads to Spray Lake Road outside Canmore. It's a gorgeous climb, but if you don't have someone waiting for you at the other end, you may not be found again.
Heading west along the Bow River from the Banff library, there is plenty of wonderful skiing on Sundance Trail that eventually winds into the woods, but it's best on windless days. Cascade Fire Road (skating and classic) on Lake Minnewanka is the trail where Francis Frost was killed by a cougar in 2001 while skiing here, so ski with a buddy -- a good idea no matter where you are.
The Banff trails are free, as are the 150 km of classic trails in the Kananaskis mountain range, 150 km southwest of Calgary. My favourites start at Pocaterra Day Lodge (which offers shelter, fireplace and washrooms but no concession, so pack a big lunch). It is easy to get turned around here, so pay attention to maps and drink enough water to stay hydrated. None of these trails have "sweepers" at the end of the day.
Outside of the parks is Canmore Nordic Centre, 100 km west of Calgary, which hosted the 1988 Olympic cross-country events. If you like ups and downs, this place is for you: There is no such thing as a flat trail among the centre's 55 kilometres. Facilities include a day lodge, cafeteria, ski store, rentals and lessons. A trail pass is $5.
Lake Louise is a little farther to drive, three hours west of Calgary, but has snow even when other areas are still brown. Nordic skiers have been logging kilometres on Moraine Lake Road and the old Highway 1A since mid-November. These two trails are on opposite sides of the Lake Louise road, but are tied together by another twisting trail system. Moraine Lake is 9 km of steady but beautiful climbing, groomed for classic and skating, with a great view of the Valley of the Ten Peaks at the top. Wrap a warm jacket around your waist to wear for the descent -- it's fast, fabulous and chilly. Six kilometres down on the left side of Moraine Lake is the entrance for the Fairview Trail. This 5-km classic trail winds through the woods and ends at Fairmont Chateau Lake Louise. The Upper Telemark that winds behind the Chateau is a 4-km classic track that crosses the IA trail and becomes the Lower Telemark for another 6 km. Both have exciting descents and fast corners to keep you on your toes. Quebec La Belle Province is the granddaddy of Nordic skiing, the province where Jackrabbit Johannsen marked the Maple Leaf Trail. His legacy still lives on in thousands of kilometres of trails today, most of which are free or cost a small fee. The old rail line that starts just north of Montreal and goes to Mont-Tremblant is groomed for skiing, with networks of trails shooting off it providing endless possibilities.
One place to pick up this incredible trail is Domaine-St. Bernard, just outside Mont-Tremblant. The lodge used to be a monastery and is still complete with a stable, great dining and wine, and lots of charm.
Imagine 295 km of skating and classic trails with warming huts every 5 km -- that's what Gatineau Park offers just minutes from Ottawa. Start at the Old Chelsea/Camp Fortune Visitor's Centre entrance where there are also cafés and Greg Christie's Skiworks for rentals, trail passes, instruction and pro shop. Hit the park during mid-February's Winterlude to participate in the winter triathlon (running, skating, Nordic skiing) or the Keskinada Loppet (10 km-55 km skating or classic), Feb. 14-16. Newfoundland and Labrador This part of the country is almost guaranteed to have early snow, and Labrador City has world-class ski trails (both World Cups and World Championships have been held here).
For a real change in direction, go north and east and check out the 35 km of fabulous skating and classic trails at Menihek (Montagnais for "challenging trail") Nordic Ski Club. There's night skiing on Vello's Trail; Koch's Delight and The Hole are for experts; and beginners can try out Dumbell Tour and The Birches. On March 29, the Great Labrador Loppet will be held here.
If you goONTARIOHorseshoe Valley: Phone: (705) 835-2790 or (800) 461-5627; Web: http://www.horseshoeresort.com. Hardwood Hills: Phone: (705) 487-3775 or (800) 387-3775; Web: http://www.hardwoodhills.on.ca. Highlands Nordic: Phone: (705) 444-5017 or (800) 263-5017; Web: http://www.highlandsnordic.on.ca. Bruce Peninsula: For information, call Bruce County Tourism at (519) 534-5344 or (800) 268-3838, or visit http://www.naturalretreat.com. Sawmill Trails: Drive north on Highway 10 to Owen Sound then north on Highway 6 to Hepworth. Trails are on the highway's east side, 1 km north of Shallow Lake. Suntrail Outfitters: Hepworth, Ont.; phone: (519) 935-2478 or (877) 882-2958; Web: http://www.suntrail.net. Provides trail passes, maps, rentals, instruction and outdoor gear. Arrowhead Provincial Park: Web: http://www.arrowheadnordic.ca. BRITISH COLUMBIAHollyburn Ridge/Cypress Mountain: Phone: (604) 922-0825; Web: http://www.geocities.com/Yosemite/Meadows/8995/hollyburnfrm or http://www.cypressbowl.com. Manning Provincial Park: Take Highway 3 east and look for the provincial park signs halfway between Hope and Princeton. Sigge's Sport Villa: Phone: (604) 731-8818 or (877) 731-8818; Web: http://www.siegges.com. A $49 package to Manning Park includes bus fare, trail pass, wine and cheese. Lost Lake: Take Highway 99 to Whistler, and look for the day skiing parking lot off Lorimer Road. Rentals, lessons and snacks are available at the trailhead. Phone: (604) 905-0071; Web: http://www.crosscountryconnection.bc.ca. ALBERTABanff trails: Web: http://www.banffskirunners.com. Kananaskis trails: Web: http://www.kananaskis.com. Canmore Nordic Centre: Phone: (403) 678-2400; Web: http://www.cd.gov.ab.ca/enjoying"alberta/parks/featured or http://www.canmorenordic.com. Lake Louise trails: Web: http://www.canadianrockies.net skithero/llxcski. QUEBECMont-Tremblant: Phone: (819) 425-5588; Web: http://www.skidefondmont-tremblant.com. Gatineau Park: Phone: (613) 239-5000 or (800) 465-1867; Web: http://www.canadascapital.gc.ca. NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADORMenihek Nordic Ski Club: Phone: (709) 944-5842; Web: http://www.crrstv.net/menihek. MORE INFORMATIONCross Country Canada: Web: canada.x-c.com. Cross Country Ontario: Web: http://www.xco.org.

