We talked to a handful of Quebecers about the 1998 Ice Storm. Here are four stories of a baby born, a farm family stranded, a coming together in Kahnawake and a cancer battle that could not wait.
'There was no stopping' the ice storm baby
It felt like the universe was playing a trick on Jolene Bear.
Of all the times her daughter could have come into the world, it had to be one month early, in the midst of the most devastating ice storm to hit Quebec in generations.
When Bear's water broke on Jan. 9, 1998, the freezing rain had battered Montreal's South Shore for nearly 80 consecutive hours - razing hydro towers, shattering trees and cloaking the region in darkness.
"The timing wasn't great," says Bear, a resident of the Kahnawake Mohawk territory. "Our power was out, we were sleeping at my mother-in-law's. There were 10 of us in that house and the roads were all covered in ice."
She woke up early that morning and knew right away the baby was coming.
"I didn't want to wake everyone up, I didn't want to cause a panic, so I hid the fact that I was in labour for a while," Bear says. "My husband's grandmother was the only other person awake, so we just sat and told stories and I hoped she wouldn't notice."
A few hours later, Bear called the local ambulance, which took over an hour to navigate the ice and tree-covered streets before arriving outside the Kahnawake home.
"When they wheeled me out - I'll never forget this - I had to close my eyes because the ice pellets were hitting me in the face," she says. "It was nice outside, sunny even, but that ice kept falling."
"My water broke in the ambulance and I remember saying, 'Hurry up! Hurry up! Hurry up!' There was no stopping her."
Five minutes after the paramedics carted Bear into the LaSalle hospital, Ta'kawisenhawe Ivory Stacey was born.
The name Ivory came from the child's aunt - who accompanied Bear to the hospital. Her Mohawk name, Ta'kawisenhawe, commemorates the chaos of Stacey's birthday. Translated into English, it literally means, "She brings the ice."
That she was born in the midst of Ice Storm '98 has given Stacey a small measure of celebrity in Kahnawake.
"When I told her the Gazette was doing a story about her birth, she kind of rolled her eyes like 'No big deal,' " Bear says. "People in town will tell her, 'You're the Ice Storm baby, you're the Ice Storm baby.' She's known for it in these parts."
Stranded on the farm, 'we rationed our fuel and made do'
Kelly Greig was lying in bed when she heard the trees crackling.
Freezing rain had been building up on the branches for hours and now they began snapping off and slamming onto the frozen ground. The thought that one of the trees could crash into the family farmhouse kept her awake for hours.
"When I woke up the next day, everything was frozen and the power was out," said Kelly, who lived on her family's farm in Ormstown during Ice Storm '98. "My dad told us school was cancelled, which is an awesome thing to hear when you're 10 years old."
But the freezing rain wouldn't let up and soon began wreaking havoc in Ormstown and the other farming communities spread across the Chateauguay Valley.
"I remember hearing a snap and I went to the upstairs window," said Kelly's mother, Mary Greig. "You could see the power line sagging and then all of a sudden the pole just snapped in half and then the next one snapped in half and the next one. I watched 20 poles go down like dominoes."
Workers repair a hydro line on the Greig family farm during Ice Storm '98. (Courtesy of the Greig family)
For the Greigs - who had 50 cows that needed milking each day - there was no time to sit around and wait for help. Every morning, Kelly's father, David Greig, would fire up a tractor-powered generator to get the milking machine in gear.
As David and his son tended to the cattle, Mary drew power from the generator to cook a meal and watch the news for updates on the government responses to the brewing crisis.
If the tractor ran out of diesel fuel or if they overloaded the generator, the whole operation would have screeched to a halt. There were diesel shortages across the valley since other farmers were also leaning on generators to keep their businesses alive.
"Had we known the power would have been out for 21 days, maybe we would have done things differently, but we didn't know," said David. "So we had to improvise. We rationed our fuel and made do with what we had."
The initial onslaught of ice effectively stranded the Greigs on their property - severing its ties to the power grid and telephone lines. And with hydro poles strewn across the roads and downed trees blocking access to the house, there was little contact between the family and the outside world.
But then David came up with an idea that was equal parts brilliant and reckless.
"We went over to the telephone line with a crowbar and broke the icy crust off it," he said. "I thought that if I could just get the wire re-attached, the phone would work again and then we'd be in business. So we spliced it together and it actually worked."
Kelly said she was just glad her father didn't electrocute himself and light up like a Christmas tree.
"It was one of those things that, at the time, seemed like it could have gone either way," she said.
"But we were also three kids stuck in a house with our parents for a month. We must have driven them crazy. I think we were all relieved when school started back again." (Courtesy of the Greig family)
Looking back, the Greigs say they're lucky they made out as well as they did. Farmers in Hemmingford, about 30 kilometres east of Ormstown, went without power for a whole month and some lost livestock.
"When I look back, I just remember my mom and dad doing whatever they could to make it easier on us," Kelly said. "My mom, she was a schoolteacher, she had us reading, playing every board game you can imagine. I must have played her at checkers like 40 times and she never let me win.
"But we were also three kids stuck in a house with our parents for a month. We must have driven them crazy. I think we were all relieved when school started back again."
In Kahnawake, 'We were ready for it'
Kellyann Meloche daydreams about worst-case scenarios: natural disasters, plane crashes, train derailments and the like.
She'll be the first to admit it's not the healthiest preoccupation, but it's one that's essential to her work.
As the longtime head of Kahnawake's emergency preparedness team, Meloche tries to predict and avert crises. She was still relatively new to the job in January 1998, on the eve of an ice storm that would bring down the South Shore's power grid for weeks.
"My colleagues used to call me Chicken Little - they thought I was always running around saying the sky was about to fall," says Meloche. "I remember looking at the forecast that January and my mind started to see that worst-case scenario. They were calling for seven days of freezing rain and snow.
"That's not only improbable, it's nearly impossible to see that kind of consistent ice storm."
Meloche says her instinct to envision chaos helped her see the potential for disaster and take action. Her team sprang into action days before the storm, setting up a command centre at the fire station and soliciting cots from the Red Cross to set up an emergency shelter at the local Knights of Columbus club.
Meanwhile, families with wood- or oil-burning stoves agreed to take in relatives whose homes relied on electricity for heat in the event of a massive power failure. By the time the power actually failed on Jan. 6, Meloche had already secured extra fuel and generators to keep the town running.
"We were ready for it," Meloche says. "It was incredible how the community came together. If you were to walk through the streets of Kahnawake in the middle of January 1998, you would have seen something incredible: people with their own trucks, their own chainsaws clearing trees from the streets, people cutting branches down before they could take out power lines.
"Neighbours helped neighbours, people just banded together and there was this real sense of solidarity. It brought out the best in everyone."
The storm didn't leave Kahnawake unscathed: hydro poles snapped under the weight of the ice, people's cars crashed into ditches and the community lost power for weeks. And while the Canadian Forces dispatched thousands of troops to help with relief efforts in nearby communities, the Mohawk territory actually declined its offer of assistance.
Eight years earlier - during the 1990 Oka Crisis - the military had landed on the South Shore reserve and forced a confrontation that led to a number of serious injuries among the civilian population.
"The wound from 1990 was still fresh and people didn't want to see army trucks rolling through town," Meloche said. "But I think there was also a sense that we had it under control and that we could help ourselves. And we did."
In the end, Meloche earned the Deputy Minister's Award for her community's response to the ice storm.
"More than anything, you're proud of the community," Meloche says. "You're proud of the moms and dads who busted out the board games to keep their kids from going crazy. Proud of the teachers who volunteered to do activities with kids at the Knights of Columbus. You're proud of the chefs who made enough food to feed our elders and hundreds of others.
"You're proud to be from a place that really values togetherness."
The 'craziness' of fighting cancer in the freezing rain
On the fourth day of the 1998 Ice Storm, Montreal resident Romy Schnaiberg called the hospital to see if her latest round of chemotherapy would be cancelled.
"I remember the nurse just said, 'Yeah, you have chemo, you need to come in," said Schnaiberg, a mother of two young children who had been undergoing treatment for breast cancer diagnosed in 1997. "Life goes on. I thought maybe I don't come in because there's an ice storm. They thought I was nuts."
The freezing rain shut down highways, damaged 24,000 hydro poles and downed thousands of kilometres of power lines - effectively bringing life to a halt in Montreal and beyond. For Schnaiberg, however, there was no choice but to keep fighting the disease that was eating away at her.
And as if the difficulty of navigating motherhood and cancer treatment during a once-in-a-lifetime ice storm wasn't enough, the chemotherapy drugs administered to Schnaiberg that day in 1998 sent her into anaphylactic shock.
"It looked like, for all intents and purposes, a heart attack," she said. "I was in a packed emergency room in the middle of the storm. It was craziness.
"When things finally settled down, I told the doctors, 'I've got a four-year-old and a two-year-old and I have to get home and make life normal for them. And they said, 'You don't understand. You're really sick.' It hadn't occurred to me, until that point, that I was that sick."
Following her doctor's recommendations, Schnaiberg decided to move her family into her husband's grandmother's apartment in Côte-St-Luc. It was one of the few buildings in the city that hadn't lost power during the storm.
"With the sickness, the kids had already had so much destruction in their lives," said Schnaiberg. "I'd had surgeries, I'd lost my hair, I was weak from the chemo. My daughter Kelsey, she used to drag my wig around the house and say, 'Mommy, put on your hair.'
"So you're in this extreme situation - in and out of the hospital, staying at a relative's apartment - and you end up having to ask for help. And you get so much support from your family, your friends, from complete strangers, from a doctor who offers his home phone number.
"There were communities cropping up everywhere, you know, wherever people needed help, people were cropping up to help them. I had people bringing me food, helping me out and all I needed to focus on was me and the kids."
Romy Schnaiberg celebrates her daughter Kelsey's birthday shortly after the 1998 ice storm. Schnaiberg battled breast cancer during the storm.
When the storm finally passed, Schnaiberg and her husband wrestled with the sorts of inconveniences that plagued families across the region: house repairs, insurance companies and finding a way to get back to normal. But while the storm presented her family with its own unique challenge, it also marked the beginning of Schnaiberg's journey toward remission.
"Sometimes people will talk about the storm and they'll try to one up each other with horror stories," she says. "I never say anything. For me, it was all part of a journey.
"I never thought of myself as a strong person before the cancer, but I think it took (the Ice Storm) for me to realize I was."
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/titocurtis( http://Twitter.com/titocurtis )
Related
20 years later, are we prepared for another Ice Storm?( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/20-years-after-the-ice-storm-with-more-extreme-weather-expected-are-we-ready )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

