Monday, May 25, 2020: A look at some of the stories we've been following today.
More challenges for CHSLDs during heat wave
As a heat wave threatens to worsen conditions inside Quebec's long-term care centres this week, advocates are calling on the provincial government to ensure every resident is protected from the hot weather. But with the majority of the centres still not having air-conditioned rooms - and many in the midst of fighting COVID-19 outbreaks? - ensuring everyone is properly sheltered from the heat and humidity will be challenging, Quebec's health minister acknowledged Monday. Read more here
Doctor relieved it will be a short heat wave
An intense prolonged heat wave could present big issues during the COVID-19 pandemic. That's why Dr. Pierre Gosselin, a consulting physician with the Institut national de santé publique du Québec, feels that the best news about this week's heat wave is that it is only expected to last three days. Environment Canada issued a special weather statement for the Montreal area on Monday that foresees local temperatures taking a three-day soar starting on Tuesday. Read more here
'It's still tight. It's still fragile'
Data show the new coronavirus is infecting, killing and sickening fewer Quebecers each day, provincial officials said Monday, but hospitals in Montreal are still at risk of being overrun by COVID-19 patients. "It's still tight. It's still fragile. That's why we're opening gradually," Premier François Legault said at his daily news conference. Read more here
Status of asylum seekers to be reviewed
The province will review "one by one" the files of asylum seekers being employed on the pandemic front lines with the goal of accepting them officially as immigrants, Premier François Legault said Monday. Read more here
No emergency funds for homeless: shelter director
Montreal is being shortchanged on emergency funding meant to go toward fighting the spread of COVID-19 among its homeless population, according to three experts on homelessness. If the situation isn't rectified soon, hundreds more people will end up living on the street before the pandemic is done. Read more here
Monkland Ave. stirs to life
Writes columnist Bill Brownstein: With the reopening of commercial businesses Monday, there was a little more life on Monkland Ave. Read more here
Meanwhile, on Ste-Catherine St.
The din of jackhammers on Ste-Catherine St. and throngs of pedestrians holding shopping bags made it seem like the coronavirus was just a bad dream on Monday. It looked like the same old downtown core, as stores in Montreal reopened after the coronavirus outbreak shuttered most businesses in March. Read more here
Plan to close St-Laurent Blvd. hits a roadblock
Mayor Valérie Plante's plan to turn over major arteries like St-Laurent Blvd. to pedestrians and cyclists during the COVID-19 pandemic has hit a roadblock in Little Italy. In city council on Monday, Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie Mayor François Croteau promised to respect merchants' wishes after a survey showed local businesses overwhelmingly oppose a proposed bike path on St-Laurent between St-Zotique and Jean-Talon Sts. Read more here
Workplace safety instructions in new plan
As many stores in Montreal opened for the first time since March on Monday, the Quebec government released a 95-page plan to continue taking the province out of confinement in the coming weeks. The electronic document is available on the Quebec government's website in both English and French. Read more here
Higher fees coming, dentists warn
Throughout Quebec, dentists are scrambling to comply with new COVID-19 safety regulations and warning of increased fees after the government announced last week clinics can reopen for regular dental procedures next Monday. Read more here
Trading privacy for more freedom?
Writes columnist Allison Hanes: Our smartphones could soon be deployed to track our movements, communicate with the devices of other people, warn us if we were exposed to someone infected with COVID-19 and alert public health officials. Are we ready for this? Read more here
Bob Gainey auctions off personal memorabilia
What are described as "unique and exclusive pieces" that belonged to Hockey Hall of Famer Bob Gainey are now up for auction until June 16. Read more here
Big screen coming to Vaudreuil-Dorion drive-in
Vaudreuil-Dorion is hoping to beat the pandemic blues by opening a drive-in cinema this summer. The drive-in, or ciné-parc in French, will be set up in the empty parking lot of Cité-des-Jeunes high school campus, off of St-Charles Ave. Read more here
A second trial for woman in ex-Hab's truck
The woman who was charged with impaired driving while she was allegedly behind the wheel of former Montreal Canadien Zack Kassian's pickup truck when it crashed in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce more than four years ago will have to undergo a second trial in October. Read more here
Are Montrealers respecting safety guidelines?
All our coronavirus-related news can be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette

