Spring flooding that disrupted thousands of lives was the major weather event in Quebec in 2019, not only because of the scale of the flooding, but for its after-effects, some of which are still being felt today.
A catastrophic convergence of heavy rains following a snowy and cold winter that prevented run-off from being soaked into the ground led to the forced evacuation of thousands of Quebecers across the province. Water levels were high enough to force the evacuation in April of the town of Grenville-sur-la-Rouge when it seemed a local dam would not hold. The event reached its peak when, on April 27, a sector of the town of Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac was evacuated after a dike broke. The Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) reported claims from damage linked to the flooding in Quebec totalled $185 million.
Pierrefonds resident Nicolas D'Alessandro walked down to the Rivière des Prairies in the Pierrefonds area of Montreal on Saturday, April 27, 2019, to monitor the flooding situation. His residence was not immediately in peril.
In total, 310 municipalities across Quebec were affected by the flooding. While the province's public security ministry has yet to compile all the statistics recorded in the towns damaged or disrupted by the floodwaters, te Presse Canadienne calculated on April 30 that 9,070 homes and 273 businesses were flooded, more than 12,000 persons displaced, 82 landslides linked to the flooding were recorded and 760 roads and highways were washed out or damaged.
Figures compiled by the province's civil protection authorities show 7,500 claims for compensation were filed with the government with $211 million paid out to claimants as of Dec. 9. About half of the claims have been settled.
A snowblower propels water back toward the Rivière des Prairies in the Ste-Geneviève area of Montreal on Saturday, April 27, 2019.
In Laval and the regions of the Laurentians and Lanaudière, the floods followed an episode of freezing rain at the beginning of April that dropped 20 mms of precipitation in those areas, the same low-pressure system also dropping 15 to 25 cms of snow between between the Abitibi and Beauce regions. The weather system also saw about 310,000 Hydro-Québec customers lose their electricity, some of them for three days.
The second-place weather event occurred at the end of October, the so-called "Halloween" storms because the threat of heavy rain and high winds caused Montreal and several other municipalities to urge parents to postpone their children's trick or treating until Nov. 1( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/josh-freed-weather-hysteria-ruined-montreals-halloween ).
N.D.G. resident Keith Wilson is wondering what kind of turnout there will be for this year's Halloween in Montreal on Thursday, Oct. 31, 2019.
A strong cold front dumped 40 to 60 mms of rain across the province, with some areas seeing as much as 80 to 110 mm, courtesy of regional deluges that caused flooding in the Eastern Townships and in the Chaudière-Appalaches regions. However, the weather event's real punch was in wind gusts over 100 km/h that knocked out power to nearly one million Hydro-Québec customers, the biggest outage since the Ice Storm of 1998. The IBC reported $250 million in claims were made in eastern Canada because of the weather system, $189 million of it in Quebec.
The start of 2019 was also marked by heavy snowfalls, with 25 to 40 cms falling across the province on Feb. 13, accompanied by wind gusts that led to white-outs in many parts of the province. Schools and roads were closed, flights delayed or cancelled and mail delivery stopped for the day.
Men carry shovels next to a row of buried cars on Edouard-Montpetit Blvd.after a storm that left 40 cms of snow behind in Montreal on Feb. 13, 2019.
Only a few weeks earlier, between Jan. 20-22, about 20 to 50 cms of snow fell in many regions of Quebec in a weather system marked by high winds and exceptionally cold temperatures that contributed to several multi-car accidents across the province. And the winter of 2019-2020 is shaping up to be equally demanding, with 15 to 25 cms of snow falling on Nov. 11, an early start to the snow season that caught many motorists still driving on all-season tires( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/after-early-storm-montreal-starts-snow-removal-operations-wednesday ). The weather system was also punctuated by wild swings in temperature that broke records for maximums and minimums across the province.
A tractor clears snow from sidewalks in the Lachine borough of Montreal on Nov. 12, 2019.
Quebec came close to recording its first tornados of the year on June 2, when two of them touched down near Ottawa with one of the twisters causing severe damage in the Orléans district in Ottawa. But the first tornado to strike the province did so on July 11, when a string of storms rampaged across Quebec in a front that stretched from Chibougamau to Toronto. An F1 tornado (138-178 km/h winds) touched down in the Lanaudière region and carved a trail of damage through 3 kilometres of trees, buildings and a campsite. Neighbouring regions were battered by heavy rains and wind gusts that left 100,000 Hydro-Québec customers without power.
Firefighters at work clearing damaged branches on Singleton Way as a reported tornado touched down in the Orléans suburb of Ottawa on June 2, 2019.
On July 30, a second F1 tornado touched down at a camp site in Lac-aux-Sables in the Mauricie region that left three persons slightly injured. The third F1 tornado was recorded Aug. 21 near Mont-Laurier that caused some material damage, followed by an F2 tornado (179 to 218 km/h) that hit the small town of Ste-Rose-de-Waterford, devastating 20,000 maple trees in orchards cultivated by local syrup producers.
Related
Our coverage of Quebec flooding( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood )
Flood maps are getting better, but still need work: Pierrefonds-Roxboro mayor( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pierrefonds-roxboro-mayor-says-flood-maps-still-need-improvement )
Josh Freed: Weather hysteria ruined Montreal's Halloween( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/josh-freed-weather-hysteria-ruined-montreals-halloween )
After early storm, Montreal starts snow-removal operations Wednesday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/after-early-storm-montreal-starts-snow-removal-operations-wednesday )

