In Sherbrooke, Quebec, police urged people not to leave their homes
? Snowmobiles were deployed to help heart-attack victims, people skied down sidewalks and cars slipped and slid as a monster storm walloped Quebec and New Brunswick on Monday.
Up to 70 centimetres was expected in pockets of the region and there were multiple road closures as snowfall greatly exceeded forecasts.
New Brunswick Hydro reported 3,000 customers were without electricity Monday afternoon in Fredericton and Bouctouche, after freezing rain also fell on that province.
In southeastern Quebec, snowmobiles were being pressed into service to help ambulances reach patients.
The police in Sherbrooke, Que., about 120 kilometres southeast of Montreal, used their snowmobiles to aid the ambulance crews by creating a path for the emergency vehicles.
In two cases Monday morning, the snowmobiles helped ambulance attendants reach two heart-attack victims who were stricken while shovelling the heavy snow.
Martin Carrier, a Sherbrooke police spokesman, said the victims were a man and a woman in their 50s.
"I've been told they're stable," Mr. Carrier said later Thursday. "There's no danger to their lives."
Police and firefighters were also deployed to help three doctors to get to the hospital, one of them a surgeon who had to perform urgent surgery.
The storm had other effects on medical services in the city, which is the largest in the Eastern Townships. The Sherbrooke university hospital centre, the area's biggest hospital, rescheduled appointments and elective surgery.
Police took the exceptional step of urging residents not to leave their houses.
"Visibility is nearly zero and there's a lot of accumulation in the streets," said Mr. Carrier at the storm's peak.
"The Sherbrooke police service is asking people to avoid travelling on the road and to stay at home."
The city put its emergency measures plan into effect in the wee hours as it became clear the weather situation was deteriorating and travel along city streets became virtually impossible.
A command post was set up to monitor snow-clearing and co-ordinate emergency response. The city's bus service was shut down. Schools and university classes in the area were cancelled.
Police urged people to only use the 911 emergency line for only the most urgent situations. The system had been flooded with calls as the storm intensified.
In several cases, cars sat in their parking spaces buried under a mountain of snow with only hints of metal peeking through the powder.
People found unique means to make their way around the city, as the air filled with the roar of snowblowers and passing plows shoved mountains of the powdery white stuff in front of them.
Snowmobiles zipped along streets as pedestrians put on snowshoes and cross-country skis to make their way around town. Some of the more adventurous even flew down hilly streets on snowboards.
Cars crawled and sometimes slipped and slid off the road, resulting in a few crunched fenders.
Elsewhere around Quebec, the provincial transport department closed some highways due to poor visibility.
Montreal got around 20 centimetres, with gusting winds. An army of snow removal equipment hit the streets in Montreal in the early-morning hours and city officials said operations were going well.
Andre Cantin, a meteorologist with Environment Canada, said the wintery blast was "quite a big storm."
"A very significant amount of precipitation fell over the Eastern Townships and just south of Montreal - in fact over the south shore all the way to Rimouski and even Gaspe," he said.
"All those regions, they got between 40 to 60 and even 70 centimetres of snow."
Mr. Cantin said the storm was not unusual for this time of year, although the amount of snow may be a record for some areas.
"The month of March is generally where we get our worst snowstorms because the air gets warmer, there's more humidity in the air, more humidity available to form precipitation."
Snowfall was greater for some areas than predicted because a weather system moved slightly from the path it was being tracked on.
Monday's storm followed the 40th anniversary of a blizzard that dumped close to 50 centimetres of snow on Montreal on March 4, 1971. That storm was blamed for 30 deaths in Quebec, 17 of them in Montreal.
Mr. Cantin said forecasters expected better weather in the coming days.
"I don't think winter is over yet but we'll get relief."

