Fires continue to burn out of control in northern Quebec, belching out an acrid cloud of smoke that reached all the way to Corner Brook and Gander, Nfld., on Wednesday.
Fires continue to burn out of control in northern Quebec, belching out an acrid cloud of smoke that reached all the way to Corner Brook and Gander, Nfld., on Wednesday.
Environment Canada says shifting winds are now blowing the smoky haze that has shrouded much of the East Coast of North America in the past few days eastward to Newfoundland - about 1,200 kilometres from the 25 fires that still rage in Quebec, six of them out of control.
New Brunswick's chief medical officer also repeated a health alert for a third day Wednesday, warning that the smoke - which is expected to linger for at least another day - could affect children, the elderly and people with respiratory problems.
Although one summer camp for children with asthma near Fredericton sent its children home, a spokesman for New Brunswick Health and Wellness said that no illnesses related to the smoke have been reported.
"We've seen some scattered incidents of people who came to emergency rooms, but those were mostly people with pre-existing conditions such as heart problems," Don Richardson told globeandmail.com. "We're hoping that's because people have heeded the chief medical officer's warnings."
About 500 firefighters, with 16 water bombers and 50 helicopters, some borrowed from other jurisdictions, are battling the Quebec blazes. During the past week, the fires have blackened about 244,000 hectares of timber, an area more than four times the size of the island of Montreal.
A change in weather overnight dropped a few millimetres of rain and blew away some smoke - but not enough to cool the worst hot spot, about 1,000 kilometres northeast of Montreal, a spokeswoman for the Quebec agency responsible for forest-fire prevention said.
"It's got a little better," Charlotte Léger said. "The biggest ones, they can't do anything about that. It's too hot."
Firefighters' attempts to stamp out the biggest blaze have had little effect, she said, because the intense heat swirls the skies so turbulently that planes cannot pass and evaporates water before its hits the burning wood.
The news wasn't all grim - the 650 residents of the Cree villages of Nemaska and Chisasibi in northern Quebec near James Bay, the only populated areas threatened by the flames, headed home after the province lifted a state of emergency on Wednesday.
Nemaska's Chief George Wapachee said the fire danger has lessened because there just is nothing left to burn - his village is the only green spot in the area.

