We are smack, dab in the middle of a brutal winter, with greater Montreal receiving 180 centimetres of snow to date, when the average winter sees 210 cm. But this is a winter about more than the snow. This is a winter about the chaotic fusion of wildly fluctuating temperatures and mixed precipitation.
"We've had a big challenge this year," Dollard-des-Ormeaux Mayor Alex Bottausci said. "Between Jan. 23 and 24, the temperature went from -25ยบ Celsius to +3ยบ. Driveways fill up with water and there is the possibility of basements flooding."
And then the reverse would happen. In less than 24 hours, the temperature would plummet from +6 Celsius to -17 C, with rain turning to sleet then to freezing rain and then snow within the same time frame.
Pools of water froze, forming a rock-solid layer of ice which would then be covered by snow.
Battalions of blue-collar workers would head out with ploughs - big and small. Trucks circulated, spreading abrasives. Once the snow stopped, out came the snow blowers and dump trucks.
So why are people throughout the West Island( https://montrealgazette.com/category/news/local-news/west-island-gazette ) complaining that the sidewalks are icy and the roads bumpy and the roadsides are piled with a rigid mix of snow and ice? Frustrated citizens blame the mayors, councillors, the blue-collar workers. Why aren't they doing their job, people ask? Why aren't they using the salt-abrasive when it is needed most, they ask?
Not everybody understands how rock-salt abrasives work. Conditions have to right for the salt to take hold and do its job. Salt stops working at -15ยบ Celsius. That's the science of it. And if you spread it while it's raining, it washes away. So what do you do when it rains and then there is a flash freeze?
"It's physically impossible to get to all the streets before the flash freeze hits and we don't have magic salt," Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue Mayor Paola Hawa said.
Ste-Anne removes snow in two distinct sectors. The northern sector has wider streets, but not many sidewalks. The southern sector has narrow streets and few front yards for homeowners to pile snow they remove from front walks and driveways.
"We get more complaints from the northern sector about there not being enough salt," Hawa said. "And then we get complaints that we use too much salt and that it hurts pets' paws. What are you supposed to do? Hats off to public works. They work all hours under constant stress and people still complain. It's a thankless job."
So what about crushed rock and sand? Even woods chips are being tested as a more environmentally-friendly abrasive.
Hawa and Bottausci both said crushed rock and sand must be used in a measured fashion because during the spring thaw, the rock and sand can clog sewers and cause flooding.
And what to do about the cars? Municipalities and residents can find themselves at odds about where to park the family car during and after a snow storm. Private contractors need access to driveways to do their job, but the municipalities need vehicle-free streets to plough. In the end cars are towed at the owner's expense. Not only is it frustrating for a the car owner, the towing process slows down the ploughs.
In the midst of all these issues are budget considerations.
"It costs between $30,000 and $40,000 each time we clear the snow," Hawa said. "It's time-and-a-half or double-time on weekends and holidays. It's no wonder we're relieved when we hear that the storm is happening on a Monday. It's a delicate balancing act between public safety and budget. If I see that it's going to rain in 12 hours, do I spend the $30,000?"
And there are operational challenges.
"We spend a lot of time explaining to people the order in which the cleaning is done and why," Bottausci said.
Main roads and roads leading to hospitals and schools are cleaned first. Sewers need to be unplugged. Secondary roads come next and residential roads, last. Snow clearing around transit hubs is also a priority. And there are always emergencies to handle. It can't all be done in the blink of an eye which means if there is a thaw and flash freeze, some smaller streets turn into skating rinks and if the temperature remains low - see above.
So how about ice crushers like the ones they have in municipalities including Kirkland and Dollard?
Ice crushers can do the job, but they are large, don't fit in narrow streets and can damage the road's surface which means costly road repairs in the future.
"And the ice crushers move slowly and require larger crews," Bottausci said. "You have several trucks going down one street. So that slows down the cleaning operation elsewhere. There is no winning with this kind of winter. But I think we are seeing the light at the end of the tunnel."
The West Island Gazette spoke with Bottausci exactly one week before the region was hit with a winter storm which dumped more than 40 cm of snow, followed one day later by a temperature fluctuation of +4 to -15 over 24 hours.
To learn more about the snow removal procedures( https://www.ville.dorval.qc.ca/en/news/article/snow-removal-operations-ongoing-2019-02-12 ) in your West Island municipality( https://www.pointe-claire.ca/en/news/40-centimetres-of-snow-during-the-storm-snow-removal-operations-are-in-progress/ ) and how weather events might affect services, visit your municipal website( http://www.ville.kirkland.qc.ca/news/id/722 ) or Facebook page. Updates are posted regularly.
kgreenaway@postmedia.com( mailto:kgreenaway@postmedia.com )
Related
In midwinter Montreal, potholes lurk beneath puddles of slush( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/potholes-springing-up-in-middle-of-winter )
Beis blasts Plante on snow clearing, calls city streets a 'war zone'( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/beis-blasts-plante-on-snow-clearing-calls-city-streets-a-war-zone )
Dollard-des-Ormeaux library gets multi-million dollar upgrade( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/dollard-des-ormeaux-library-gets-multi-million-dollar-upgrade )

