New technology unveiled during Friday night's Canadiens game allows hockey fans to choose which camera angle to watch the game
Is it the future of televised hockey or simply a fascinating footnote on the road to more sophisticated NHL coverage? CBC rolled out its online access camera feature for Friday night's Boston-Montreal centennial celebration. As the Canadiens (finally) put 100 years of history behind them, it was intriguing to think that the access cam launch might be almost as historic an occasion as the game.
For those who watched Friday, the chance to say they were there the day 360 became a commercial reality in hockey.
The device - positioned at centre ice, just above the level of the protective glass - provides a 360-degree panorama of the action during a game. Fans with the requisite online technological capability can choose to view the play on the ice, the players on the bench, the fans in the stands, the Jumbotron or just about anything else that occurs within the radius of the device (which was developed by Calgary's Immersive Media). Eagle-eyed viewers could see Sergei Kostitsyn flee down the tunnel to the dressing room after taking a big hit or catch Bruins players sharing a laugh on the bench.
In effect, fans can now produce their own broadcast of the game without the middle man of a director choosing shots. There was no play-by-play associated with the game. Thanks to Chevrolet's sponsorship of the soccer-ball sized gizmo, there were no commercial interruptions. Online viewers had the closest approximation of a live game experience as a result. (The NFL has recently used versions of the 360 technology for major games and for breaking down highlights or strategies.) Of course, they also suffered the ear-splitting music and in-game promotions of the Bell Centre.
So how did it work? Technically, the experiment - which will be repeated at various games throughout the year - seemed to work well. There were no lags or delays in the coverage, no dropouts, no blurring of the action (unless you tried to zoom in). Essentially it was like having the viewing field of a very good seat - without binoculars to get closer. Or the smell of the Bell Centre hot dogs.
Drawbacks? Once viewers were finished noodling the technology's novelties, it settled into a more conventional game cast (which the TV pros capture well already). The nets seem a little distant. Despite the win, the hapless Habs don't look any better in 360 than they do in high definition. But certainly, nothing enough to warrant complaint.
According to Hockey Night in Canada executive producer Sherali Najak, cost and accessibility in various arenas will dictate future usage. The access cam will be available for the Winter Classic on New Year's Day.
Close Call
The vicious winter storm that hit western Canada on Friday almost played havoc with CBC's coverage of the women's World Cup races at Lake Louise. Host Scott Russell was caught in transit as the Calgary airport cancelled almost half its inbound flights. The Trans Canada Highway leading to Lake Louise, too, was closed for a time. Contingency plans were drawn up, local CBC host Doug Dirks (already at the venue) was put on notice to stand by. After an arduous day's travel from Toronto, Russell finally made it through the blizzard to the Chateau Lake Louise at 2 a.m. to call the races that went off at noon.
Tin Cup Nothing quite like the final day of the PGA Tour's qualifying school. Exultation and despond for the game's grinders hoping to be the next Tiger, er, Phil Mickelson.
Today's final round on the Golf Channel is a torturous, six-hour ordeal for the Canadians and others in the field to get their Tour card for 2010. Graham DeLaet of Weyburn, Sask., is close to a lock for his card, but the other Canadians will be hard pressed to get one of the top 25 and ties who receive exemptions for 2010. Chris Baryla of Vernon, B.C., has a card but is trying to upgrade. If you want reality TV, just watch the faces on the 18th hole today.
Can You Hear Me Yet?
Finally, Rod Peterson, the Saskatchewan Roughriders' play-by-play caller, had a Grey Cup to forget. After calling Corus' nationwide radio feed of the first half of the game at McMahon Stadium in Calgary, Peterson watched the second half on the sidelines while Rick Moffatt of Montreal's CJAD called the second half of Montreal's dramatic win.
Peterson was up close and personal at the bench for the Riders' bitter 13th-man denouement. Devastated after the game, he noticed his cell phone hadn't been working on the field. When he finally got it to work he found a message from the radio booth. Believing Saskatchewan was about to win, the producers had invited him to come back up to call the final three minutes of the game - and, without knowing, chronicle the Roughriders' classic choke.

