In its usual understated way, Environment Canada put a small asterisk beside Wednesday's weather forecast and called it an "abnormal temperature trend."
That's what happens when the temperature drops during the day or rises overnight, as if we didn't have enough trouble deciding how to dress on autumn mornings.
It's been abnormally chilly in Montreal since the beginning of October, even with Tuesday's notable 27-degree-Celsius blip. According to Environment's Canada's historical data, most Octobers start off at a mild 16 C and drop by less than half a degree each day till we hit 9 C by Oct. 31. Some of those later days could see temperatures drop near freezing at night.
This October, however, we started at 13.7 C and have wavered around 10 C, with two above-20 days. The next week will continue to hover in the lower double digits. Accuweather, which makes longer-term predictions than Environment Canada, promises more of the same, with a few seasonably warm days in a chilly sea of clouds and rainfall.
"Latest trends support a reinforcing shot of colder air into eastern Canada after Oct. 16 as a strong ridge builds over British Columbia," Accuweather head meteorologist Brett Anderson says. "The air may be cold enough for snow showers across Ontario and Quebec around Oct. 17. Directly downwind and close to the abnormally warm lakes, it will be mostly rain with the potential for thunder and waterspouts."
Less sunlight might contribute to a feeling of gloom. The sun doesn't rise till after 7 these days, and it's setting before suppertime. In 25 days, it'll be time to turn back the clocks, and there will be fewer and fewer sunshine hours till Dec. 21.
But is it gloomier than we expected? Montrealers are no strangers to wearing snowsuits under Halloween costumes and two pairs of gloves while biking to work. We layer like champions and our most Québécois dishes are designed for cozy evenings with the heat cranked up.
Related
'We need to act now' on climate change: Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/we-need-to-act-now-on-climate-change-montreal-mayor-valerie-plante )
Canada's goals well below what's needed to stop catastrophic climate change: UN( https://montrealgazette.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/canadas-goals-well-below-whats-needed-to-stop-catastrophic-climate-change-un/wcm/cc495259-969c-4acf-8690-872a5424a80b )
Opinion: Climate change panel delivers message of hope, call to action( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/opinion-climate-change-panel-delivers-message-of-hope-call-to-action )

