The Kanesatake youth centre burned to the ground Sunday in what Grand Chief Serge Simon said is likely a case of arson.
Simon said his wife roused him from bed late that evening in a panic.
"She said 'The youth centre is on fire, the youth centre is on fire!' So I threw on some shorts and ran out the door," said Simon, the grand chief of the Mohawk Council of Kanesatake.
"I could see the flames from my house. ... When I got within a few hundred feet of the building, I could barely stand the heat."
There is no fire department and there are no fire hydrants on the Mohawk territory, which depends on a volunteer service from neighbouring Oka.
News of the blaze spread quickly over social media Sunday night.
"I really hope this was not deliberately set," wrote Kanesatake resident Cheryl McDonald. "The youth centre was one of the few safe places for the kids to all come together. May this tragedy be the bang that wakes up and unites Kanesatake."
Sources told the Montreal Gazette two all-terrain vehicles were seen in the area around the time of the fire. The youth centre is next to a field that sprawls into the nearby pine forest.
The Sûreté du Québec hasn't opened an investigation into the fire, and the Oka fire department could not immediately be reached for comment.
Simon said someone tried to set fire to the youth centre four years ago, and he's "99 per cent sure" this was a case of arson. There have been several high-profile cases of arson on the Mohawk territory in recent years.
Vandals set fire to the abandoned police station in 2015, and someone burned down an administrative building next to the local gym two years prior to that.
The most infamous local arson dates back to 2004, when then-Grand Chief James Gabriel brought in 50 outside police officers to seize the local peacekeeper station. Gabriel said he was attempting to root out local corruption and raid local cannabis farms.
In the end, a small but militant resistance formed around the peacekeeper station - trapping Gabriel and the officers inside. During the ensuing standoff, a handful of local men set fire to Gabriel's house.
The Kanesatake youth centre is next to a field that sprawls into the nearby pine forest.
In the case of the youth centre, there's no clear evidence yet that an arson has been committed.
However, the building is insured, and Simon said the Mohawk council will erect a "bigger, better and more secure" one in its place.
"We're going to look and see if we can get in-kind contributions from the provincial or federal government," Simon said. "We may as well take this as a chance to rebuild something our youth can be proud of."
This story will be updated.
Related
Kanesatake after-school program: 'We can't afford to lose this'( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/kanesatake-after-school-program-we-cant-afford-to-lose-this )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

