? - Quebec's powerful provincial pension fund is raising questions about the planned $1.3-billion takeover of the Montreal derivatives exchange by the Toronto Stock Exchange.
The Caisse de dépot et placement du Québec, which owns nearly 8 per cent of the Montreal Exchange, said Monday morning that there should be a "public debate" on the proposed deal, unveiled earlier in the day. It wants the debate to cover a variety of topics, from the ultimate viability of the combined entity the transaction would create to the roles Quebec-based representatives will have on its board of directors and executive committee.
"It is essential that these questions be answered before we take a definitive stand on the proposal," Caisse chief executive officer Henri-Paul Rousseau said in a news release issued about four hours after Montreal Exchange Inc. and TSX Group Inc. confirmed that they plan to combine forces.
The agreement to create a new entity named TMX Group Inc. comes after months of on-again, off-again talks over the politically contentious issue of a tie-up to create a stronger bourse better able to compete in a rapidly consolidating industry.
Mr. Rousseau said the Caisse wants to know whether the combined exchanges would remain viable given the emergence of many competing platforms in the equity markets and the increasing number of Canadian companies that are inter-listing their shares for trading on U.S. exchanges.
"This is especially important since the market for standardized derivatives is quite likely to grow significantly in the years to come," he said.
He also asked "where the decision-making centre will be" and what will happen to the operations in Montreal where, he said, the MX has developed "leading-edge" expertise in derivatives.
"We would like to know what the Toronto Stock Exchange's intentions are in this regard before we take our analysis further. A public debate is needed," Mr. Rousseau concluded.
The two exchanges said that the combined company will have an 18-member board of directors, 25 per cent of whom must be Quebec residents, and will include five MX-designated directors, including MX CEO Luc Bertrand, who will serve as deputy-CEO of the new entity.
Under the deal unveiled a little after 7:30 a.m. (EST) Monday, MX shareholders are to receive 0.5 of a TSX Group share and $13.95 in cash for each of the shares in the Montreal derivatives exchange.
The companies are valuing the price at $39 per MX share, based on the $50.10 closing price of TSX group shares Nov. 28 , before the latest spate of speculation about a deal began, and at $42.56 based on their Friday close of $57.22, when rumblings of an imminent deal were overwhelming.
MX shareholders will own 18 per cent of the new exchange, while TSX investors will hold 81 per cent.
At $42.56, the offer represents a premium of $5.36, or 14.4 per cent, for each MX share over the Friday closing price of $37.20.
News of the planned merger pushed MX shares up $2.98 or 8 per cent to $40.18 as midday approached, while TSX shares were off $3.38 or 5.9 per cent to $53.84.
The combination of Canada's two largest exchanges will make for a stronger global market player with improved expansion opportunities, particularly in the U.S., investors were told Monday morning.
"Today, we are building a made-in-Canada exchange," Richard Nesbitt, CEO of TSX Group, said on a conference call. Under the terms of the deal, Mr. Nesbitt will serve as CEO of the merged entity, The new entity is "uniquely positioned" for growth opportunities, Mr. Bertrand said.
MX already has a significant stake in the Boston Options Exchange (BOX) and there are "strong prospects" for growth in the U.S., he added.
"This combination grows out of a common vision for the future of the Canadian capital markets," Mr. Nesbitt said in the news release announcing the merger. "Customers in Canada and internationally will benefit from increased liquidity levels, accelerated product development, a fully diversified product suite, and superior technology."
Mr. Bertrand said in the release that the combination will "redefine the Canadian capital markets and strengthen its global positioning."
"We are creating a new exchange group that builds on the respective strengths and successes of both organizations," said Mr. Bertrand, who emphasized that Montreal will remain the centre of Canada's derivatives markets.
The companies said they have targeted cost synergies of $25-million. That's the equivalent of about 14 per cent of their $176-million combined operating expenses in the first nine months of this year.
They said they plan to generate savings by optimizing their technology platforms, rationalizing premises and data centres and reducing corporate costs.
The companies said that TMX Group's head office will be located in Toronto, while MX's head office will remain in Montreal. As well, the MX will continue to manage the Montréal Climate Exchange. The combined company will be chaired by TSX Group's current chairman, Wayne Fox.
No single shareholder will be allowed to own more than 10 per cent of the combined TMX Group, unless amendments to this restriction are approved by both the Ontario Securities Commission and Quebec's Autorité des Marchés Financiers (AMF).
Sources had said that the Quebec government supported the merger. Quebec had insisted on the importance of Montreal being the derivatives specialist for Canada.
Under terms of a 10-year agreement, Toronto is barred from getting into the fast-growing derivatives trading sector until March, 2009. Montreal was granted the exclusivity on derivatives trading after Canada's exchanges agreed to a realignment about 10 years ago.
The agreement also requires MX to pay TSX Group a termination fee of $46-million if it ultimately accepts a competing takeover offer, although TSX Group would have the right to match a rival bid.
Sources have said that the New York Mercantile Exchange, or Nymex, and the Intercontinental Exchange, known as ICE, both put forward takeover proposals for the MX, but that Toronto was keen to best those offers. Toronto had also been putting heat on Montreal, threatening to build a competing - and potentially damaging - derivatives business starting in 2009.
However, analyst John Aiken at Dundee Securities Inc. told clients in a note Monday morning that he thinks it is "unlikely" a competing offer will emerge.
Mr. Aiken also argued that although the combination will make TSX Group more attractive to international exchange acquirers, he thinks there is only a "remote" chance this will occur, "given the protectionism that has historically been shown regarding Canadian financial institutions."
The deal must be approved by holders of two-thirds of MX's shares at a meeting set to be held Feb. 13, the companies said.
The MX board is recommending shareholders vote in favour of the transaction and have committed to tendering the 7 per cent stake in the company they own.
The talks between Montreal and Toronto had broken down over the summer.
After renewed talks between the two became tense recently, Quebec Finance Minister Monique Jérôme-Forget slammed Toronto for allegedly walking away from a proposed merger because of a reluctance to give a prominent role to a management team based in Montreal.
Federal Finance Minister Jim Flaherty called on the two companies in September to set aside their differences and join forces, saying it would be in the national interest to do so.
Many observers have argued that it makes sense for the two relatively tiny exchanges to get together rather than try to weaken each other by fighting over the derivatives turf.
Mr. Aiken at Dundee said he views the merger announcement "positively, even though we believe that the acquisition will be dilutive to TSX Group's earnings in 2008."
He also said that keeping Mr. Bertrand on in a key role "will likely be critical in selling the deal to Quebec's regulators and political machine.
"While a transaction could likely be done more economically efficiently by reducing the level of activity in Montreal, we note that this is critical in winning political acceptance for the deal, as . . . Quebec's financial regulator, needs to approve any single interest in MX above 10 per cent.
Toronto money manager Thomas Caldwell, who has made a specialty of investing in exchanges around the world to profit from the rolling wave of consolidation, has been a vociferous advocate of a TSX-MX marriage and welcomed the deal Monday.
"As I've said before, my biggest fear if I were a director of Toronto, or indeed a shareholder, would be to wake up one day and find Montreal had been taken out by someone else," he said when reached by telephone at Caldwell Securities Ltd. in Toronto. "It was a bit bumpy to get there. . .but it had to be done. I don't think the parties had much choice at the end of the day."
Caldwell Securities owns about $20-million in TSX shares and $20-million in MX shares for itself and its clients. Urbana Corp., a separate public company set up and controlled by Caldwell to invest in financial exchanges, holds about $7.5-million in MX shares and $8.5 million in TSX stock, Mr. Caldwell said.
Ian Bandeen, who heads would-be TSX rival Pure Trading and its corporate parent Canadian Trading and Quotation System Inc., which operates a market for small-cap stocks, also said the TSX-MX merger makes plenty of sense.
Mr. Bandeen also suggested that in some ways, the TSX may have more to gain from the deal. "The MX corporate culture is newer and more forward looking," he said in a telephone interview from his Toronto office. "They're a little bit leaner and more hungry, and that's a culture that I think you'd want to embrace or respect."
Citing Montreal's successful acquisition of its BOX stake, he also said it has had more success than the TSX on the acquisitions front and that Toronto may be able to learn from the MX on this score.
"They lost out on Winnipeg, if they were ever in the running," he said, alluding to the acquisition of the Winnipeg Commodities Exchange by Intercontinental Exchange Inc. of Atlanta.
Mr. Bandeen also said nothing seems to have come of "serious talks" the TSX has had with the Philadelphia and Amex exchanges.
The TSX launched a lawsuit against Pure Trading earlier this year alleging breach of copyright, but Mr. Bandeen has dismissed the action as baseless.

