Laurent Ruffier-Lanche had just ordered about 100 additional chairs and tables for his downtown food market when the pandemic hit.
"They're in storage now, as you can imagine," Ruffier-Lanche, who manages Time Out Market's Montreal location inside the Eaton Centre, said in an interview late last month while giving a Montreal Gazette reporter a tour of the premises. "One day we'll bring them out."
When that happens is anybody's guess. After almost three months of inactivity because of the coronavirus pandemic, Time Out's 40,000-square-foot space reopened for business July 8 - but at a vastly reduced clip. Instead of 16 food offerings, the space now counts six active concessionaires, as well as a cooking school, a retail space and three bars.
To get the space ready, Time Out invested in safety - adding signage, sanitation stations, Plexiglas shields at bars, counters and tables, as well as a contactless order system. All staffers wear personal protective equipment.
But will the measures Time Out and other downtown food courts have put in place be enough to ensure their long-term survival?
"We're lucky in a certain sense of having this huge space with high ceilings, and the ability to bring in fresh air regularly," Didier Souillat, Time Out Group's London-based chief executive officer, said in a telephone interview late last month. "It's easier to do social distancing with 40,000 square feet than it is with 2,000."
If early indications are anything to go by, business has a ways to go to bounce back. On a recent lunch hour, about two dozen customers were scattered across a space that can seat 390 people. When it opened in November, Time Out's original capacity of 550 often seemed insufficient to meet demand.
Laurent Ruffier-Lanche is the general manager of the Time Out Market at Montreal's Eaton Centre.
Time Out isn't the only company to have invested in a new food concept just before the pandemic hit.
In January, Place Ville Marie owner Ivanhoé Cambridge opened Le Cathcart, a 1,000-seat location that includes two cafés, three full-service restaurants and nine food kiosks - part of a $1-billion revamp of the venerable office complex. The opening followed that of Le Central, a 25-restaurant food court inside the Carré Saint-Laurent project at the corner of Ste-Catherine St. and St-Laurent Blvd.
Both spaces recently reopened with reduced seating - a reflection of the funk that has gripped downtown Montreal this summer.
No more than 5 per cent of the estimated 300,000 office tower workers are back working downtown, Chamber of Commerce of Metropolitan Montreal chief executive officer Michel Leblanc said late last month. Some area restaurants that would normally serve 300 meals a day now have to get by with as few as eight meals, he said.
"You can't walk away from the fact that if people aren't commuting anymore, if people aren't traveling anymore, if people aren't going to the office anymore, it's not going to be good for business," Souillat said. "We're happy to be open, but we need tourists to come back and people to come back to the offices, basically."
Walmart Canada president Haio Barbeito predicted in a presentation hosted in July by the Retail Council of Canada it will take at least two years for food-service sales to recover. As teleworking gains in popularity, more people will embrace home cooking at the expense of eating out, he said.
"It will take a while" for things to improve, Souillat said. "That's why we are staggering our tenants back in, little by little. The pie is only so big. You can't divide it by 18. Right now every week is looking a bit better."
COVID-19 is making food-service businesses "take a long hard look at their concepts," Francine Rodier, a marketing strategy professor at Université du Québec à Montréal, said in a telephone interview. "When you depend on office-tower workers for business, you are going to suffer. You need to get creative."
Last week, Time Out began offering home delivery in a bid to revive sales by striking a deal with DoorDash.
"We never really wanted to have people with helmets and bags coming through our food halls," Souillat said. "It wasn't part of our business plan. We want people to come and enjoy the food, but we have to adapt. Our experience just shows that businesses have to react pretty fast."
The way Souillat tells it, Time Out has what it takes to ride out the COVID-19 storm until the spring.
"I'm pushing to make sure we limit damages till the end of this winter, and hoping - of course I'm being optimistic - that from April next year we get back in full swing," he said. "When the pie becomes a little bit bigger and tenants are ready to come back, we will welcome them back. We're here for a long time. We're here for at least 10 years."
ftomesco@postmedia.com
Related
Brownstein: High-end Montreal restaurants offer takeout with a twist
Food hall monitor: How do Montreal's new marketplaces compare to one another?
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for July 30 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here



