Also: Toronto police say new human remains found in Bruce McArthur investigation and China says U.S. is ‘opening fire' on world with tariff threats
Good evening,
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW
Quebec health officials attribute 33 deaths in province to heat
At least 33 deaths in Quebec have been attributed to the heat wave that has been ravaging the province for the past six days, as the furnace-like temperatures reached into the mid-40s with the humidity on Thursday.
Montreal's public health director, Mylène Drouin, said that 18 of the people who have died since the heat wave began last week lived in Montreal. The living conditions of the deceased, experts say, may have played a role: Most of the victims, aged 53 to 85, lived on the upper floors of building units without air conditioning. These developments are also in areas of the city known as heat islands, which are urban areas where there is little vegetation and large expanses of heat-retaining concrete.
As of Thursday afternoon, there had been no other heat-related deaths reported in other provinces, though Environment Canada says the heat warning for Southern Ontario, Atlantic Canada and Quebec will remain in effect until Friday morning with the weather agency adding smog warnings for some parts of southern Quebec.
This is the daily Evening Update newsletter. If you're reading this online, or if someone forwarded this e-mail to you, you can sign up for Evening Update and all Globe newsletters here. Have feedback? Let us know what you think.
Ex-Quebec construction mogul Tony Accurso gets four-year prison term
Since the Quebec's anti-corruption police force, Unité permanente anti-corruption (UPAC), was created in 2011, prosecutors have laid criminal charges against 331 people and companies, but have achieved only about 114 convictions as of July 1, according to UPAC's annual statistics and 2018 reports. The bulk of the remaining suspects await trial, sometimes for years, while a few others have been acquitted or had cases thrown out or charges dropped.
Today, however, marks a rare moment of celebration of the UPAC force's efforts, as former Quebec construction mogul Tony Accurso received a four-year prison term following his conviction on fraud and corruption charges. A jury had recently found Mr. Accurso guilty on all five charges laid against him, all of which stemmed from a scheme dating back to the late 90s that was orchestrated by a former mayor of Laval and involved a kickback scheme where companies paid off city officials in exchange for public contracts.
New human remains found in Bruce McArthur investigation, Toronto police say
Police confirmed on Thursday that new human remains were found during Wednesday's investigation of alleged serial killer Bruce McArthur at a Toronto ravine near a property where they previously found the remains of seven men in planters. The 66-year-old alleged serial killer was arrested last January and charged with the first-degree murders of eight men with ties to Toronto's Gay Village; the remains of the eighth person he is accused of murdering, Majeed Kayhan, have yet to be found.
When police discovered the planters in January, they had attempted to search the Leaside property, where Mr. McArthur had worked as a landscaper for years, but found the earth was too hard and cold to break through. Police confirmed that they will continue working at the site for several more weeks, as there were additional sites flagged by cadaver dogs as points of interest.
Read about the lives of the eight victims of the alleged serial killer who preyed for years on the city's Gay Village in this report from Tu Thanh Ha and Justin Ling.
U.S. ‘opening fire' on world with tariff threats, China says
With the initial round of U.S. tariffs against China set to take effect at 12:01 a.m. EDT on Friday, China has accused Trump's administration of "opening fire" on the world. The two largest economies will be facing off against one another starting tomorrow, with China warning they will respond immediately to the duties on $34-billion in Chinese goods with tariffs on American goods that they say will disrupt the supplies of components and assembly work of American and foreign companies operating in China.
The trade war could further escalate, as Trump has promised to counter to any response from China with tariffs on as much as $450 billion worth of Chinese goods.
Meanwhile, Canada won the bulk of a ruling at the World Trade Organization on Thursday in a dispute over U.S. duties on Canadian exports of supercalendered paper, which is used in glossy magazines and catalogues. Canada filed the complaint in 2016, saying Washington was wrong to penalize Canada for subsidizing its paper industry, but the final ruling can be appealed by either side.
Ontario says federal government should pay for housing ‘mess' caused by border crossers
A spokesman for Premier Doug Ford said the federal government is encouraging people to cross into Canada illegally and is responsible for the housing crisis "mess" and should therefore bear 100 per cent of the cost.
Trudeau met with Ford in Toronto this afternoon, and said afterwards he spent some time explaining to the premier how the asylum-seeking system works, stressing the need for collaboration from both levels of government.
Toronto shelters have recently been overwhelmed by the thousands of migrants who have entered Canada through Manitoba and Quebec and are seeking refuge in the city's emergency housing system. The federal government has previously said they couldn't provide direct assistance to Ontario until Ford's Conservative government was sworn in, but they did pledge $50 million to Ontario, Quebec and Manitoba to help offset some of the costs from the influx in asylum seekers crossing at the Canada-U.S. border.
MARKET WATCH
Canada's main stock index edged lower on Thursday, led by declines in energy stocks due to a drop in oil prices. The Toronto Stock Exchange's S&P/TSX composite index was down 38.11 points, or 0.23 per cent, at 16,266.61. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 182.74 points, or 0.76 per cent, to 24,357.56, the S&P 500 gained 23.51 points, or 0.87 per cent, to 2,736.73 and the Nasdaq Composite added 83.75 points, or 1.12 per cent, to 7,586.43.
Wall Street's major indexes rose as reports that the United States and the European Union may agree to withdraw auto tariffs fostered optimism on international trade relations among investors.
Got a news tip that you'd like us to look into? E-mail us at tips@globeandmail.com. Need to share documents securely? Reach out via SecureDrop.
WHAT'S TRENDING ON SOCIAL
Canadians likely to cut U.S. travel, boycott U.S. goods and retailers in trade war with Americans
According to a new poll conducted for The Globe and Mail by Nanos Research, nearly three in four Canadians say they are likely, or somewhat likely, to stop travelling to the United States because of the cross-border conflict started by the U.S. President.
More than seven in 10 Canadians also say they are likely, or somewhat likely, to boycott U.S.-made goods, the poll found. Nearly the same percentage also say they are likely or somewhat likely to stop shopping at U.S. retailers in Canada.
TALKING POINTS
More police are not the solution to Toronto's gun violence
"When the cyclical problem of gun violence strikes Toronto, it's often too easy for the numbers and percentages to become abstractions, rather than individual tragedies affecting far too many families and communities across this city. If there's to be any conversation about what can be done, it has to begin and end with those families, and with those communities." - Andray Domise, freelance writer based in Toronto
Hands off migrants' DNA
"That's the most basic thing about DNA - you share it with your relatives. And black, Latino and other racialized families have plenty of bad history with doctors and police wielding new technology, from being made the unwitting subjects of experiments, to having planted evidence used to frame them. RAICES made the right decision, and the 100 black and brown workers of Bayham, Ont., are justified in feeling abused." - Denise Balkissoon
Toronto can look to Vancouver for what's sadly next in gun violence
"Toronto is a big, sprawling, multi-ethnic community that, in many ways, is a bigger version of Surrey. The wave of gun violence in the city is undoubtedly the result of many things, the clash of gangs being among them. Shootings are often incited by turf wars and retaliations. Sometimes they are touched off by personal grudges or the littlest perceived slight. And if Surrey's gun violence history is any indication, these shooting sprees often come in unexplainable waves." - Gary Mason
LIVING BETTER
It took Katherine Laidlaw 32 years to find the right scent for her everyday application. Once she found her go-to formula - something she described as "the least perfume-like perfume I'd ever worn" - she discovered the reason why she had been wearing the wrong fragrance for the past few decades: She was making her selections based on other people's preferences, not her own. Though it took a cancer scare for her to uncover this truth about herself, she now she basks in the fact that she smells like "unwashed, sun-baked summer skin."
LONG READS FOR A LONG COMMUTE
‘It is about Xi as the leader of the world': Former detainees recount abuse in Chinese re-education centres
Authorities in China's far western Xinjiang province have made loyalty to President Xi Jinping a central part of an extensive political re-education campaign that requires detainees to swear allegiance to the Communist Party while denouncing a Muslim faith that they are told to repeat is "stupid." Researchers estimate the total number of people that have been placed in these re-education centres, many of whom are minority Muslim Uyghurs and Kazakhs, are in the hundreds of thousands. Asia correspondent Nathan VanderKlippe interviews people who have been in those centres and reveals through their conversations how China's current leader occupies a place of singular importance in China's efforts to rectify what it deems errant thinking.
The ups and downs of a multigen family vacation in Tuscany
Day one of writer Johanna Schneller's family vacation to Tuscany with her eight family members did not start out well. She had rented a villa in Tuscany for two weeks with travellers ranging in age from their early 20s to late 80s, making for an interesting mix of contradictory hopes, follies and neuroses. It only took cramming the whole motley crew into an enormous white standard-shift Fiat van to realize that sometimes the trip you don't plan for can make for the most memorable experience. Being forced to change her travel pace taught her to embrace a more vivid, memorable holiday and by the end of the vacation she had achieved a rare feat: the family was all at the same level of blissed-out travel harmony, all at the same moment.
Evening Update is written by Johanna Chisholm. If you'd like to receive this newsletter by e-mail every weekday evening, go here to sign up. If you have any feedback, send us a note.

