Montreal VIA Rail executive who visited her Yugoslav roots was inspired to launch International Children's Institute to help the lost children of Croatia
? The Croatian taxi driver took his passenger from Canada deep within the forest. On the last dark, lonely path, he abruptly stopped. An armed party of silent men had suddenly appeared in front of them.
Her life might have been over at any second, yet the former VIA Rail executive overcame her fear and stepped out of the cab. At stake was the future of the lost children of Croatia.
Madeline-Ann Aksich was a champion of innocence and her brainchild was a children's institute she established shortly after the outbreak of war in Yugoslavia in 1991. She believed in the catharsis of storytelling and used it to help Croatian children to unburden themselves of the traumas inflicted by war.
The daughter of a former Yugoslavian diplomat to the United Nations who settled in Montreal, Ms. Aksich was in Croatia on business when she requested a meeting with an official from the Croatian ministry of health. She had the idea of raising money to help rebuild Dubrovnik, a city not far from her family's traditional home on the island of Sipan. When the official responded that the plight of the country's children was a far more pressing concern, the International Children's Institute was born.
The child of Anton Aksich and Kay Orloff, Madeline-Ann Aksich attended McGill University where she earned both her BA and MBA. Following graduation, she became an executive with Via Rail and worked as an international business consultant. A fixture in the non-profit sector of non-government agencies, she sat on the board of directors for the Couchiching Institute and worked tirelessly for the Montreal Musée des beaux arts and the YWCA.
In 1992, she left her consultant's job to devote herself entirely to the ICI. The institute quickly established programs in Bosnia, Sierra Leone and Kosovo. Its mandate: to send books, games, sports equipment, puppets and art supplies to refugee camps to help children cope with their traumas.
One of the ideas that she was most proud of was an innovation that addressed the needs of children who complained that no one was listening to them. The children felt so isolated and disconnected from their immediate families, she wrote in her memoirs, that she came up with a bold solution that would allow the children to be heard everywhere, by everyone in the camp.
"We bought loudspeakers, really big loudspeakers, and a radio system, and established a weekly radio program, by the children, for the children . . . All the adults had to listen to the children because the volume was cranked up really loud. So even if they stayed within their barracks and did not come out, they heard."
For Ms. Aksich, children influencing policy and influencing parent action was what the International Children's Institute's programs were all about. Storytelling and drawing also became an important element. Ms. Aksich and her staff realized that the war children of Croatia -- and later those of Bosnia, Sierra Leone and other war zones -- could make a powerful statement. They all offered the same message -- an overwhelming cry for peace. On another level, their words and pictures demonstrated a profound resilience. Children are slow to surrender and hold high a hope in the future, even when the odds seem to be against them. Their messages came through loud and clear, says the ICI website: "Because children often repress less than most adults, they can also be far more eloquent."
What follows is a condensation of three stories. One boy identified only as C. A. wrote: "The gunfire woke me up and I was very afraid. Everything was burning and shaking, and I thought that nothing would remain from this life. I heard screams coming from under my house. We fled and went through the forest for nine days and nights, exhausted and thirsty. But we were cut off by the enemy trucks and men who loaded us all inside. They struck us with their rifles and insulted us. I was afraid. They took us to a school in Kalinovik and placed us in the classrooms, where we spent our days filled with sorrow and pain. I saw a lot of people being taken away and killed. The days were filled with death and blood. I was in that dark camp for two months."
K. E., a girl, who suffered an amputation, wrote: "I asked my mother if I could go outside and play. My two sisters were with me. Suddenly, grenades started falling around us. I guess it must have been out of fear that I began to climb the nearest tree. Thick smoke and dust were everywhere.
"I felt pain and I saw blood all over my leg. The pain was terrible, unbearable. The ambulance came soon. They picked us up, my sisters and me, and loaded us inside. My leg really ached a lot, and I kept asking my sister to move her own legs off me. Then I lost consciousness. I woke up in the hospital. Mother was there, crying, and she told me that my sisters were dead."
A boy from Sierra Leone wrote: "The rebels burned many houses and took many properties. They burned my father's two houses. They also killed my father and my mother in my presence. They said, 'Everyone come out of the house!' So we came out, and they made my father and my mother, as well as my brothers, go back inside to burn together with the house. I saw my parents burning in the fire."
Not only was she someone of conviction, Madeline-Ann Aksich also possessed the ability to breathe life into ideas. In 1993, she hoped to organize a conference in Dubrovnik to bring together policy makers, school-board officials, teachers, parents, as well as community members and children to work on solutions to help the youngest victims of the war. Yet nothing could happen until she got government permission. So in Zagreb she found a taxi cab that would take her to meet an official named Slobodan Lang. The cab delivered her to his bodyguard in the forest.
"They had their weapons aimed at the car," she said years later. "I [had]told no one where I was going. No one knew where I was."
The taxi sped away and she was immediately searched. It was only then that she learned the men with the machine guns were part of Slobodan Lang's security forces. They escorted her to their special attaché of humanitarian affairs who ended up wholeheartedly sanctioning her conference proposal.
A superb navigator of bureaucracies, Ms. Aksich lobbied tirelessly on behalf of her cause. In 1996, she was invited to the Carter Centre in Atlanta, Ga., to represent Canada at a mental-health conference. She was disappointed to find that access to former U.S. first lady Roslyn Carter, a woman whose philosophy on mental health inspired her own, was restricted. At a conference dinner, former U.S. president Jimmy Carter and his wife appeared only when surrounded by Secret Service agents and were clearly off limits to the rest of the guests. Determined to have a word with Mrs. Carter, Ms. Aksich waited for an opportunity.
"Towards desert time, I stood up and approached Mrs. Carter. A security guard immediately put his hand out to usher me back. I said, 'Mrs. Carter, my name is Madeline Aksich and I recently set up an Organization called the International Children's Institute.' "
At that point, Ms. Aksich had the savvy to invoke the name of former prime minister Pierre Trudeau. It worked. "She knew Trudeau very well . . . Within 30 seconds I'd given her the highlights when she asked, 'How do you spell your last name?' "
Six weeks later, Ms. Aksich received a phone call from the secretary of the Carter Centre with the news that Mrs. Carter would not only endorse the ICI but do it in front of the press. In July of 1996, Mrs. Carter flew to Montreal for the official inauguration of the ICI.
In 2002, Ms. Aksich was awarded the order of Canada. By then, she was seriously ill and then governor-general Adrienne Clarkson broke with tradition to make the presentation at Ms. Aksich's home in Beaconsfield, Que. The year before, Ms. Aksich had been diagnosed with uterine cancer and told she had just three months to live.
Defying the odds by living years beyond her prognosis, she returned to the former Yugoslavia. Her mother, Kay Aksich said determination alone kept her alive. "There were things she needed to do and she lived to ensure that those things got done."
Madeline-Ann Aksich was born
in Montreal on June 28, 1956.
She died of uterine cancer
in Montreal on Sept. 25, 2005.
She leaves her mother, Kay, her brother Anthony, and thousands of children around the world.

