On the night of Dec. 31, as we joyfully rang in the New Year, we never dreamed we would be shaking our heads in disbelief at how our world has changed. COVID-19 has given us time to reflect, re-prioritize and reminisce about life as we knew it. We are developing a keener appreciation for the things we take for granted, reconsidering what is most important in our lives and recalling a time when the situation we are currently facing would have been unimaginable.
These events would have been part of some apocalyptic movie playing at our local theatre. Our eyes would have been riveted to the screen while we munched on popcorn. But this isn't a movie, and so we try to find reassurance and comfort in those things that give us some sense of normalcy. For practising Christians worldwide, that reassurance is Easter.
COVID-19 has disrupted people's livelihoods and children's education, and impacted such milestone events as graduations, school proms, weddings, birthdays, and sadly, even funerals. This year, Easter seems all but forgotten.
The realization that Lent and Easter would not be "traditionally" celebrated has been a difficult one. The pandemic hit the Christian community in the middle of Lent. This 40-day season, which encourages prayer, introspection, charitable giving and fasting, does not require social contact, but Palm Sunday proved a challenge.
Our parish placed a table in the church parking lot for the distribution of palm leaves and prayer literature on Sunday morning. Parishioners were invited to drive by and pick up their palm leaves, sparking curiosity among morning joggers, dog walkers and neighbours. My husband, the church pastor, and I conversed with several people, including those of different faiths, all the while maintaining a safe distance.
The observance of Holy Week and the Good Friday Walk of Faith in Dollard-des-Ormeaux was modified so that through the miracle of modern technology, Christians could still experience some of these events in a unique and meaningful way. Maundy Thursday (the day before Good Friday), which has always included a service and potluck supper with a neighbouring church, was cancelled. This year's Walk of Faith took the form of recorded Bible readings and prayers. Others ventured outdoors for a solitary journey in quiet contemplation.
But we missed the solemnity of the group procession, the act of gathering in recognition of Good Friday, and the camaraderie among the walkers. Rain or shine, walkers of all ages and abilities would wind their way along the designated route, symbolically following in Jesus's footsteps.
Easter is the highlight of the church calendar, more significant than Christmas as the story of the resurrection embodies the crux of the Christian faith. The jubilant hymns and joyful atmosphere of the Easter service will be muted. Those of Ukrainian origin, like myself, may busy themselves with baking paska (Easter bread) or creating decorative pysanky (Easter eggs). Easter dinner can still be enjoyed within households, while others may share their Easter meal online, freezing leftovers for a later date. Now would be the time to try new recipes, bake a gorgeous Easter cake, or deliver leftovers to the doorsteps of family members and the elderly isolated at home.
The challenge that all people of faith are facing at this time is the inability to gather and exchange such meaningful gestures as handshakes, embraces or an encouraging pat on the back. This is part of being human. Perhaps this Easter gives us more reason than ever to put aside our differences and view others with compassion and caring, following the example of Jesus.
I encourage Christians to celebrate Easter however they can, respecting social distancing. Have a safe and happy Easter!
Natalie Turko-Slack works as an administrative assistant and is married to a Lutheran pastor.
Related
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed: Not the holiday you envisioned, but that's OK( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/fariha-naqvi-mohamed-not-the-holiday-you-envisioned-but-thats-ok/ )
How do you celebrate Easter and Passover in isolation?( https://montrealgazette.com/news/how-are-the-spring-holidays-of-easter-and-passover-different-this-year-from-any-other-year/ )
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for April 10 here( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-canada-tops-20000-cases-500-deaths ). All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).

