As a blizzard swept across Montreal's North Shore Tuesday, technicians from across the province scrambled to restore power to the 250,000 homes and businesses still in the dark.
More than 230,000 Hydro-Québec( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/hydro-quebec ) clients in Laval, the Laurentians and the Lanaudière regions were still without electricity Tuesday afternoon after freezing rain battered the province Monday. A Montreal-area forecast showed no sign of the weather waning, with a mix of freezing rain and snow expected into the night.
In Deux-Montagnes, one of the hardest-hit areas north of Montreal, people lined up outside a greasy spoon on Oka Rd. to get their first warm meal since the power went out Monday afternoon.
"Normally we're busy like this on a Sunday, but Tuesday? This is a first," said Monique Lécuyer, a waitress. "They called me in at the last minute to handle this rush. We've got to turn on a dime and roll up our sleeves, I guess."
The restaurant staff hustled between construction workers, seniors and parents whose smiling children just found out they'd be missing school Tuesday.
"I saw the transformer on my street explode," said Maxime Beaudet, who stood in line outside the restaurant. "It was an explosion of blue and the power went out on our block. It's just my dogs and me at home but we're snuggling and keeping warm."
Beaudet said it was a large tree branch, weighed down by ice, that snapped and hit the power lines, causing the explosion.
"Firefighters were already at the scene, trying to clear the lines," he said.
There were over 700 service interruptions across the province Tuesday afternoon, according to Hydro-Québec. That means crews had to be deployed to hundreds of sites, where they would evaluate the damage and begin their repairs.
Emergency crews were brought to the Montreal area from Sherbrooke and the state of Vermont, according to Hydro-Québec.
Across the island of Laval, where a thick film of ice covered power lines and branches, police went door to door checking to make sure families were safe Tuesday, particularly in areas hardest hit by the outages: Auteuil, Fabreville and Duvernay. There have been two cases of carbon monoxide poisoning since the ice storm began.
In one, a family of four was hospitalized after using a propane-fuelled barbecue to warm their home. The other involved just one person.
Firefighters reported high levels of carbon monoxide inside both homes. Neither case was life-threatening, according to Urgences Santé.
Families crowded into the Carrefour Laval mall early Tuesday to drink hot coffee and get out of their cold homes. Some children sat with their smartphones plugged into electrical outlets, logging onto social media to catch up on the latest news and gossip.
"It's better than being in class," said one high-school student from Chomedey.
Laval Mayor Marc Demers urged residents to check in with their neighbours, particularly older residents and those less able to deal with the outages, to ensure they are all right.
Hydro-Québec officials said Tuesday morning they hope to have power re-established to most clients by the end of the day. The efforts of repair crews were complicated Monday by the damage done to the power grid by fallen trees and fallen wires coated in ice by freezing rain.
"We recorded 10 to 15 millimetres of freezing rain in some areas along with high winds," said Hydro-Québec spokesperson Louis-Olivier Batty, adding that the weather system that caused the damage cut a swath from the lower Laurentians to north of Montreal. "That corridor saw a lot of trees and branches fall on the (power distribution) network."
The Commission scolaire de Laval, Commission scolaire des Affluents, Commission scolaire Wilfrid Laurier and the Commission scolaire de la Seigneurie-des-Mille-Iles announced on Tuesday that all of their schools were closed for the day.
Meanwhile, the city of Laval announced it had opened two community centres for residents without power in need of warming up or a shower. The centres are: the Centre Communautaire Accès at 6500 Arthur Sauveé Blvd. in Laval-Ouest and the ??Centre Communautaire de Lausanne at 455 Lausanne St. in Vimont.
Presse Canadienne contributed to this report

