Busy day? Here's what you might have missed.
The Montreal morgue has become crowded as a direct result of the heatwave that swept across Quebec over the past week( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-morgue-filled-to-capacity-due-to-heat-related-deaths ). La Presse has reported that the coroner's office had to make an agreement with a funeral home( http://www.lapresse.ca/actualites/grand-montreal/201807/06/01-5188633-la-morgue-de-montreal-deborde.php ) to house some of the remains. Over the past week, public health officials have emphasized how the intense heat leaves elderly people who live alone at risk. Many of the bodies examined by coroners in recent days were in a state of advanced decay, having sometimes spent up to two days in the heat in a dwelling before being found, according to Jean Brochu, a Montreal coroner. All deaths associated with the heat wave are considered "traumatic" and are the subject of a coroner's inquest. The data collected is used to establish trends and is likely to influence public health interventions in the future. Unclaimed bodies occupy a significant amount of the 128 places available at the morgue, Brochu said.
A Montreal firefighter fell to his death on Pakistan's treacherous K2 mountain( https://montrealgazette.com/news/canada/canadian-climber-dies-in-fall-on-pakistans-treacherous-k2/wcm/8360e6e6-ccb5-48bb-aca4-97cd689f2141 ). Serge Dessureault, 53, had been a captain with Montreal's fire department, according to a spokesman for the city's firefighters' association. He was leading the nine-member "K2-Broad Peak" expedition up the mountain, which is extremely steep and attracts notoriously bad weather. Karrar Haidri, the secretary of Alpine Club of Pakistan, said Dessureault's body was brought to the mountain's advance base camp and would be transported to Islamabad. A Facebook page following the climb of Dessureault and two other climbers said Dessureault "took a fall near camp 2 at 6,700 metres" early Saturday. "It is with an indescribable sadness that we announce Serge's death this morning," read the message on the page Serge Dessureault, Maurice Beausejour et Nathalie Fortin au K2.
C'est avec une grande tristesse et un immense regret que le SIM a appris le décès du capitaine Serge Dessureault, de la caserne 19, suite à une chute mortelle à proximité du sommet du K2. Nos plus sincères condoléances à la famille ainsi qu'aux collègues pompiers.
- Sécurité incendieMTL (@MTL_SIM) July 7, 2018( https://twitter.com/MTL_SIM/status/1015664096581021696?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
Montreal International Jazz Festival organizers say they "could do better" when it comes to racial issues( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/jazz-fest-wraps-up ). "We're just starting to listen," jazz fest CEO Jacques-André Dupont said at the festival's closing press conference on Saturday. "It's a very complicated conversation and I haven't started understanding everything." Much of the event centred on SLAV, the cancelled "theatrical odyssey based on slave songs" led by a white director and star. Dupont said that he and Laurent Saulnier, the festival's vice-president for programming, spent four hours Friday speaking with members of the city's black community who approached them to discuss SLAV and the issues black Montrealers face. "We were told that the world is changing ... that we should listen more, that we don't understand some subjects well," he said. Organizers said they did not pre-approve any festival content beforehand and they were "initally surprised" by the negative reactions to SLAV. Dozens of protesters demonstrated in front of the Théatre du Nouveau Monde( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/protesters-denounce-predominantly-white-performance-at-montreal-jazz-festival ) during the three performances of SLAV that went ahead before it was cancelled. Dupont said that a minority of protesters who became violent contributed to the decision to cancel the show. Another factor was the fitness of Bonifassi, who injured her ankle( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/two-performances-of-controversial-show-slav-cancelled-due-to-singers-broken-ankle-jazz-fest-says ) and told organizers she was in no condition to continue performing. In a statement, organizers of the festival said that despite the cancellation of the show, they were proud to be associated with Ex Machina and the show's director, Robert Lepage.
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette

