Environment Canada is calling for a risk of freezing rain this morning and that on top of the normal road closings it might be a good day to stay home.
New Champlain Bridge construction/ Nuns' Island Corridor
Highway 15 North, between Highway 10 and the entrance of Edouard Monpetit Blvd., will be completely closed until Monday at 5 a.m.
Highway 10 East toward the Champlain Bridge, at Exit 4, will be completely closed until Monday at 5 a.m.
Complete closing of Exit 57-N (Chemin de la Pointe Nord, Île-des-Sours) until Monday at 5 a.m.
l'Île-des-Sours Blvd. near Highway 15 will also be closed in both directions.
Turcot Interchange - De la Verendrye sector
Complete closing of eastbound De La Vérendrye Blvd., between Galt St. and Highway 15, until Monday at 5 a.m.
Closing by default of the Highway 15 ramps to Décarie and to Highway 20 West (toward Lachine and Dorval) until Monday at 5 a.m.
Turcot Interchange
The ramp from Highway 20 East to Highway 15 North will be completely closed until Monday at 5 a.m. The ramp from Highway 720/R136 West to Highway 15 North will also be completely closed.
Mercier Bridge
The Mercier Bridge toward Kahnawake/South Shore will be completely closed from Saturday at 1 a.m. to Monday at 5 a.m. One of two lanes normally heading to Montreal will be rerouted for traffic heading to Kahnawake.
The AIrlie St. ramp onto Route 138 West will be closed as a result.
Montreal West/Angrignon Interchanges
Complete closing of Exit 64 (Angrignon, St. Jacques St.) from Highway 20 East, until Monday at 5 a.m.
Complete closing of Notre-Dame St. West, in both directions, between Dollard Ave. and Angrignon Blvd. until Monday at 5 a.m.
The ramp onto Highway 20 from Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue Blvd. (toward the Mercier Bridge and the airport) will be closed until Monday at 5 a.m.
Highway 25 and Louis-Hippolyte-La Fontaine Tunnel
Highway 25 North will be completely closed between Exit 90 (Route 132) on Highway 20 West in Longueuil and Souligny Ave. in Montreal, including the Louis-Hippolyte-La Fontaine Tunnel, until Saturday at 8 a.m.
By default, also closed from 10 p.m. Friday to 9 a.m. Saturday will be the ramps from Route 132 East and West to Highway 25 North, and the entrances from l'Île-Charron St. and Marie-Victorin Blvd. East and West.

