A river runs through it? McGill College Ave., that is. Really.
What could possibly go wrong here?
One of the ideas floated by local and international experts at last week's three-day meeting on the redesign possibilities for McGill College Ave. entailed a body of water that would run down from the mountain through to the city centre( https://montrealgazette.com/news/experts-citizens-meet-to-discuss-future-of-mcgill-college-ave ) - just like in the good old days.
This could even be cost effective. The next time there is a water main leak on upper Peel St., the city, in lieu of fixing the problem, could simply send the cascading waterfall down McGill College. Even toss in a couple of fjords for good measure.
Actually, the city would have to divert the flow of water with isthmuses or something, otherwise McGill University, for whom the avenue is named, would be submerged and students and profs would have to be issued scuba gear for their underwater classes.
In some respects, the good old days are still with us. That's because the waters have never really subsided. There is rarely a week that goes by in town when sewers don't back up and our streets aren't flooded.
Freezing rain in late 1998 turned into a soupy mess on McGill College.
Other ideas that were bandied about at the meeting involved everything from transforming McGill College Ave. into a pedestrian-only square and an elevated park with much green space.
But at least Mayor Valérie Plante and her parks czar Luc Ferrandez appear to be open and realistic about changes.
"We're not going to satisfy everyone," she said.
Ya think?
"Is it a street, is it an avenue, is it a field, is it a river? Everything is open and everything is on the table," he said.
Right. But the far bigger issue on the table is the chaos that is set to descend on the downtown core once this project as well as all the the others, the Phillips Square reboot, the Ste-Catherine St. revamp and the REM station construction, kick in.
What we will then have is the perfectly imperfect storm.
A man jumps over a stream of water from a broken water main at Peel and Ste. Catherine Sts. in in 2016.
Consumers are already turned off from shopping and dining downtown with ongoing gridlock from current road construction projects and detours. All these events coming together simultaneously could transform the city centre into a ghost town.
Well and good to wish to turn the downtown core into a postcard-pretty urban-scape in the future, but at what cost?
In fact, the only group that appears to be profiting from all these beautifying the city schemes - from turning the Mount Royal drive into a car-free corridor to morphing McGill College Ave. into our very own Niagara Falls - is the Office de consultation publique de Montréal (OCPM). (Many are waiting with bated breath for the OCPM's long-awaited finding on the future of the mountain road.)
But what really seems to be lost on the city administration is the recent study on folks fleeing the city for the 'burbs in record numbers?
Last month, a report on inter-regional migration by the Institut de la statistique du Québec revealed that Montreal lost 24,000 residents to other regions in the province, which represented the largest net loss( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/new-figures-show-an-exodus-from-montreal-toward-suburbs ) of city dwellers since 2009-2010.
Thanks to births and immigrants, the city's population has continued to grow - although that could soon be curtailed if the CAQ is able to clamp down on the flow of immigrants to this province, as is its intention.
Mayor Plante announced that she plans to address this issue with a three-pronged approach: making city housing more affordable; improving quality of life; and making it easier to get around Montreal.
Good luck here, particularly on that last item. Unless the CAQ wants to pony up for a Pink Line or the city has plans for a monorail or flying cars come into being shortly, this ain't going to be happening any time soon.
As for reaction to the redesign plans, Elena, a barista at the McGill College Ave. Starbucks, feels change is necessary for this artery. "There always seems to be some sort of construction happening on the street," she says. "It would be nice to come up with one solution for the long term and be finished with it. But if they did turn it into a river, at least (Starbucks) is connected to the métro."
So she wouldn't have to swim to work.
Montreal lawyer Sam Minzberg, whose office is on McGill College Ave., would also like to see the area spruced up, but has no desire to swim to work, either.
"I guess I'd have to take a canoe to work," he says. "I wouldn't be wild about that, nor would my clients. It would be the River of Tears for many of us here."
bbrownstein@postmedia.com( mailto:bbrownstein@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/billbrownstein( https://twitter.com/billbrownstein )
Related
Exodus from Montreal toward the suburbs is growing, study shows( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/new-figures-show-an-exodus-from-montreal-toward-suburbs )
Experts, citizens meet to discuss future of McGill College Ave.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/experts-citizens-meet-to-discuss-future-of-mcgill-college-ave )

