The Quebec Court of Appeal has rejected a motion by Montreal asking it to suspend a judgment ordering the city to bury a contaminated creek on the Meadowbrook Golf Club.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-appeals-court-order-to-bury-meadowbrook-stream )
In the July 25 ruling, appeal court judge Geneviève Marcotte notes that the city has known about the contamination since at least 2002, yet done nothing about it.
She rejected Montreal's argument that it shouldn't be forced to divert the creek into the sewer system because it would be preferable to fix crossed sewer pipes in Côte St-Luc and Montreal West that are causing the contamination.
Marcotte also threw out the city's claim that it will suffer irreparable prejudice if it fixes the crossed connections, but is ordered to bury the creek anyway.
Documents filed in the case show the city has known for years that about 218 addresses in Côte St-Luc and Montreal West have been spewing sewage into a storm sewer that is polluting the creek. Montreal tried unsuccessfully to name the two other municipalities as co-defendants, arguing they should share responsibility since the contamination is coming from their territory.
From the court documents, "it is difficult for me to conclude that the public interest would be better served by perpetuating the city's inertia while the creek remains an open-air sewer. By its own admission, the city has been aware of the contamination since 2002. It has known the cause since 2004 and apparently has done nothing since then to fix the situation, aside from trying without success to involve the other towns in the legal debate," she writes in the judgment.
Marcotte adds she does not want to "condone the city's inertia" and orders it to act within the deadlines set by the court instead of complaining that they are too short.
On July 12, the city appealed a ruling by Quebec Superior Court( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/last-remnant-of-st-pierre-river-could-be-buried ) on June 7 ordering it to turn the creek into an underground sewer, arguing that burying a river is contrary to Quebec's Environment Quality Act. City lawyers noted that the Meadowbrook creek is the last surviving remnant of the St-Pierre River, which once wound from Mount Royal to Old Montreal.
The city also said the deadlines set by the court are too short. The ruling had ordered it to apply to the Quebec environment department for a permit to bury the creek within four months, "cap" (bury) the creek within 18 months and decontaminate the riverbed and banks within 24 months.
The appeal court will rule on other aspects of the city's appeal at a later date.
Developer Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific Inc. had sued the city to force it to bury the brook. Even though Groupe Pacific won, it is also appealing the ruling and is asking the court to order the creek buried even if the environment department refuses a permit, and even if it is no longer contaminated.
Louise Legault, director of Les Amis du Parc Meadowbrook, said that while the judge's frustration with the city's failure to clean up the contamination is understandable, eliminating the creek is not the answer.
"I'm disappointed," she said.
"We don't want the creek buried. It's got a role to play environmentally," she said, noting that waterways are important for providing natural drainage and combatting heat islands.
Legault said it would be tragic to lose the last remnant of the St-Pierre, which once meandered through present-day Snowdon, Côte St-Luc, Ville St-Pierre and St-Henri( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/from-the-archives-our-islands-lost-rivers ) - flowing into a lake on the site of the Turcot Yards before joining the St. Lawrence River in Old Montreal. Explorer Samuel de Champlain described the river when he explored Montreal in 1611.
"You get rid of that and there's nothing left of that river. It's an opportunity lost," Legault said.
"When you consider that other cities are daylighting their rivers, they're going to be burying it," she said.
Daniel Green, co-president of the Société pour vaincre la pollution (SVP), said the ruling should come as a wake-up call to the city.
"They haven't done a damn thing since 2001," he said.
"They seem to be competent on identifying the source of the problem, but incompetent to do something about it," Green added.
Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific bought the land for $3 million in 2006, which straddles Montreal and Côte St-Luc, and later proposed a 1,600-unit residential complex called Petite Rivière, of which the creek would be a prominent feature.
Montreal blocked development on the site by designating it as recreational green space in 2015, while Co^te St- Luc zoned its portion of the site as recreational in 2000.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Marian Scott, Montreal Gazette

