Finally, a few sunny days has me changing my flannel bed sheets, rolling up rugs (I love the cool tile floors in warm weather) and closing the blinds each afternoon to keep the house cool. Yes, summer is 'somewhat' arriving next week! I'm praying the heat won't be as bad as last year's high temperatures, but I'm also getting my place ready just in case.
For me, that's a lot of work because my house is mostly decorated for cooler weather, with draperies, dark rugs and wool-upholstered furnishings. But sometimes all it takes is one small change (or decor accessory) to change your perception of how cool a room feels. If I add a seaside-scented candle, display beach glass in a bowl or bring in a new palm plant, I feel transported to a breezy summer island. Looking for summer-inspired accessories to cool down the look of your home? Here you go...now let's keep those temperatures cool!
Chill out
Let this old-style dispenser be your best hydrating friend, whether your spot to enjoy the hot weather is the balcony or your boudoir. Fill with ice cubes, garden mint and lemon slices then top up with water throughout the day. Ahhh! Recycled Glass Beverage Dispenser, $20, Homesense.ca
Breathe easy
Breathable linen bedding keeps you cool at night and the longer your relationship (with the sheets, that is!), the softer to the skin linen becomes. Washed Linen Duvet Cover in chrome colour, $250, MaisonTESS.com
Cool-down style
Picnics and potlucks never looked so stylish! The glass is heatproof and the bamboo lid doubles as a base for the bowl when serving. 365 Glass food container with bamboo lid, $6, IKEA.com
Bohemian breeze
An airy open-weave design keeps the breeze flowing right through this side table. The fade-resistant handwoven PVC cord over a rustproof steel frame makes it ideal indoors and out. White/Grey Side Table, $148, UrbanBarn.com
Cool as a cucumber
Keep your fruits and veggies cool and show off your best tropical finds when shopping the Atwater or Jean-Talon Market with this eco-friendly fridge storage tote. Hand Picked Freshness Reusable Drawstring bag, $10, Simons.ca.
Try these tried and true ways to keep you and your home cool on extra hot days.
The Science of Circulating Air - Hot air rises: To release hot air that's built up during the day, run the fan in an upper level bathroom after sunset. At the same time, open a window or door on a lower level to invite the cooler night air in and up.
Get Wet Feet: During extreme heat waves, wet a pair of cotton socks and wear them to bed (place a towel under your feet to keep mattress dry). The air movement from a circulation fan will cool your feet and lower your body temp until you fall asleep.
Take a Dip ... or Two: Who needs a pool? Keep the tub filled with cool water and take a quick dip (10 minutes) to cool down. Don't use soap and bath oils so you can reuse the bath water throughout the day - although you could add three or four drops of blue food colouring and pretend it's a pool!
Do you have a decor dilemma or want to give feedback? You can contact Karl on Facebook or Instagram at Karl Lohnes Designer.
Karl has worked as a home decor expert and product designer for 25 years. He appears Thursdays during the 8 a.m. hour on Global News Morning Montreal.