Ry Cooder (Théâtre Maisonneuve, Place des Arts)
The blues has taken on many forms over the decades. In the hands of Ry Cooder, who recently returned to his roots as an Americana explorer, it becomes something earthy and primordial. Following an opening set by his son Joachim (who returned as Cooder's drummer), the singer-guitarist sat on stage at Théâtre Maisonneuve, imbuing the politically-tinged songs of his new album Prodigal son with timeless depth.
Jean-Michel Blais (Maison symphonique de Montréal)
There has been no shortage of buzz around Quebec pianist Jean-Michel Blais over the past few years. And so a double bill with Icelandic multi-instrumentalist Ólafur Arnalds at the state-of-the-art Maison Symphonique on the first Friday night of jazz fest was entirely earned. Blais composes like he plays - with epic sweep and intuitive subtlety, like Yann Tiersen's Amélie Poulin soundtrack with a modern twist. Spoken word samples and subtle electronic touches lent dashes of mystery, the whole levitating to otherworldly dimensions.
Mélissa Laveaux (Cinquième Salle, Place des Arts)
Former Montrealer Mélissa Laveaux, now based in Paris, is a force to be reckoned with. She sings songs influenced by her Haitian heritage, yet they come out with a rock-soul-Caribbean twist. Her smoky voice bends and swerves with thrilling ease, while her electric guitar cuts through her lilting compositions. The resulting impression is of a vastly talented young artist fully in control of the disparate elements at her disposal.
Davina and the Vagabonds (Rio Tinto Stage)
In the 30-degree evening heat, Davina and the Vagabonds" New Orleans-tinged swinging sound was vintage jazz fest fun. The site was packed and the wildly diverse crowd was digging every minute. When she pulled out a fiery cover of Ain't That a Shame, standing still was not an option.
Boulevards (TD Stage)
"Bonjour y'all." Ten minutes into his show on the jazz fest main stage, Jamil Rashad was a hot, sweaty mess. The North Carolina funk revivalist was shimmying up a storm as he and his band plunged deep into the groove. The crowd stretched from de Maisonneuve down to Ste. Catherine St. on Place des Festivals, and the party was officially on.
The Montreal International Jazz Festival continues to July 7. For more info, visit montrealjazzfest.com( https://www.montrealjazzfest.com/ )
Related
More festival coverage here( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/montreal-festivals )
CREDIT: T'Cha Dunlevy, Montreal Gazette

