While daylight saving time offered the luxury of additional sleep for the Monday-to-Friday crowd yesterday, the extra hour on the clock meant another hour in the office for some of Canadian university football's top coaches.
In a cross-country checkup of who was hard at work yesterday morning, six days before the Canadian Interuniversity Sport playoffs, it was the Manitoba Bisons' Brian Dobie, Laurier Golden Hawks' Gary Jeffries and Steve Sumarah of the Saint Mary's Huskies caught on the job, answering the phone.
With eight semi-final games scheduled for Saturday, all three said, despite being among the favourites heading in, they weren't taking anything for granted.
With that in mind, here's a look of what to expect from the first leg of the road to the 2006 Vanier Cup:
Canada West
Regina Rams (4-4) at (No. 2) Manitoba Bisons (8-0)
Previous meeting: Oct. 21 - Bisons 49, Rams 44
After finishing the regular season as the lone undefeated team in the CIS, Manitoba celebrated on the sidelines with an ice-bucket shower for long-time bench boss Dobie. The coach, understandably, appreciated the gesture, but wasn't about to get caught up in the hoopla. He has, after all, been down this road before. In 2002, the Bisons were 8-0 and the top-ranked team in the country the final five weeks of the season. A lopsided loss to Saskatchewan in the first round of the playoffs, however, and Manitoba's hard work went down the drain. And while his team is confident that won't happen this time around, Dobie sees the Rams as challenge. "We're playing the team that we think is the most dangerous team in Canada West," he said. "They're so explosive. Their M.O. is they pretty much abandon the run ... They just throw the ball all over the field like no one else, regardless of down and distance, regardless of whether they're up 17 or down 21. They're a big-play team, and they're a very threatening team every time they have possession. It will be a high-scoring game, guaranteed."
UBC Thunderbirds (4-4) at (No. 5) Saskatchewan Huskies (6-2)
Previous meeting: Sept. 23 - Huskies 35, T-Birds 33
A high-powered Thunderbirds offence, led by running back Chris Ciezki, matches up against a tough-as-nails Huskies defence in Saskatoon. Saskatchewan is the defending conference champ and brings a lot of experience on both sides of the ball.
Ontario (OUA)
Western Ontario Mustangs (6-3) at (No. 7) Laurier Golden Hawks (6-2)
Previous meeting: Sept. 23 - Golden Hawks 34, Mustangs 18
His team may have won the Vanier Cup the last time around, but Jeffries says the dreaded championship hangover hasn't affected the Golden Hawks' attention to detail this season. "We were out there this morning, we had a practice in a blizzard," he said yesterday from Waterloo, Ont. "But given the alternative, we're glad to be out there." On Saturday, Laurier will host Western, a team coming off of a 20-16 upset win over the eighth-ranked Windsor Lancers. "It's always exciting playing Western," Jeffries said. "It's one of the great rivalries in Ontario, and I think we've played some of the most exciting football games that have been seen in this league. There's no reason to think this will be any different."
Queen's Golden Gaels (5-4) at (No. 3) Ottawa Gee-Gees (7-1)
Previous meeting: Oct. 7 - Gee-Gees 34, Golden Gaels 13
After shocking the Mustangs in the final game of the regular season to slink into the final playoff spot, Queen's pulled out another upset on Saturday, with a 25-19 win that eliminated the McMaster Marauders. The Little Team That Could will have their work cut out for them this Saturday, however, as Ottawa boasted the top offence and defence in Ontario this season.
Quebec
McGill Redmen (3-4) at (No. 1) Laval Rouge et Or (7-1)
Previous meeting: Sept. 16 - Rouge et Or 43, Redmen 27
The top-ranked team in the country for the entire season, Laval is coming off its first loss of the year, a 7-2 defeat at the hands of the Montreal Carabins on Saturday. Expect a quarterback's duel between Laval's Benoit Groulx and McGill's Matt Connell, two of the top pivots in the country.
(No. 6) Montreal Carabins (6-2) at (No. 4) Concordia Stingers (6-2)
Previous meeting: Sept. 16 - Stingers 25, Carabins 11
The two top rushing teams in Quebec go head-to-head as these intercity rivals meet in the semi-finals for the second season in a row. Montreal came out on top 28-17 last time around, but the Stingers have home-field advantage and won handily against the Carabins during the regular season.ƒo
Atlantic (AUS)ƒo
St. Francis Xavier X-Men (2-5) at Saint Mary's Huskies (3-4)ƒo
Previous meetings: Sept. 9 - X-Men 21, Huskies 19; Oct. 27 - Huskies 32, X-Men 0ƒo
After a promising 2-0 start to the season, the X-Men have lost five in a row, including a lopsided loss on Friday to the team they'll face this weekend in Halifax. Given St. FX's Jekyll-and-Hyde campaign, coach Sumarah says he's not quite sure what to expect from the X-Men. "We're approaching [the game]very cautiously," he said. "This is kind of one of those sleeping dogs. I mean, they've gone five games and have only gotten one touchdown. But those are the teams that scare me more. Those [struggling]teams, you just have to hope you get up early on them. Because you don't want them to hang around - that's when you get in trouble."ƒo
Mount Allison Mounties (2-5) at Acadia Axemen (5-3)ƒo
Previous meetings: Sept. 9 - Axemen 34, Mounties 9; Oct. 28 - Axemen 34, Mounties 15ƒo
The Mounties' real victory this season came when they ended a 34-game losing streak earlier this month, giving the program its first win since 2002. Given that Mount Allison has drawn the defending conference champions in the semi-finals, that will likely be as big a leap as the rebuilding program makes this season.

