A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Loving the heat? Prepare for a cooler than usual June in Montreal( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/loving-the-heat-prepare-for-a-cooler-than-usual-june-in-montreal )
If you enjoyed the burst of heat in Montreal this week, savour your last bit of it over a weekend that's expected to be sunny and dry. After a May that was slightly warmer than usual, Montrealers can expect a cooler than usual first half of June, according to Environment Canada. Subtropical storm Alberto, which caused evacuations and states of emergencies in some parts of the United States this week before it started to recede on Wednesday, is responsible for the warm and humid weather that Montreal saw this week. "We expect the rest of the summer to be maybe close or slightly over the normal" temperature, said meteorologist Simon Legault.
Turtles need crossing guards to help them survive on Quebec roads( http://montrealgazette.com/news/turtles-need-crossing-guards-to-help-them-survive-on-quebec-roads )
June is a dangerous month for turtles. It's then that the females hit the road - figuratively and literally. They leave the relative safety of their wetlands habitats, including rivers, lakes and ponds, to search out a spot to lay their eggs. You might see them on sand or gravel road shoulders - and that's a behaviour that puts them at risk for being struck by passing vehicles, said Caroline Gagné, a biologist with the Nature Conservancy of Canada( http://www.natureconservancy.ca/en/ ) (NCC). Quebec has eight native species of turtle: The Blanding's turtle, map turtle, musk turtle, painted turtle, snapping turtle, spotted turtle, spiny softshell turtle and wood turtle. To help reduce their mortality rate on the roads, the NCC developed a website for reporting turtle sightings, carapace.ca( https://www.carapace.ca/en/ ).
Blanding's turtle, one of several species of turtle found in Quebec.
Bertrand Charest case: Geneviève Simard, 3 others win right to speak out( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/4-sexual-assault-victims-of-bertrand-charest-want-chance-to-speak-out )
Former Canadian Olympic skier Geneviève Simard and three other women who were sexually assaulted by former national ski coach Bertrand Charest had publication bans on their identities lifted on Friday so they can share their experiences in the interests of preventing similar abuse of athletes. The four women, who will speak publicly Monday, were among the nine victims Charest was convicted of sexually assaulting during the 1990s. His trial was held last year in St-Jérôme. Simard, 37, filed a complaint against Charest on Feb. 5, 2015. Twelve women in all ended up filing complaints and, last year, Charest was found guilty on 37 charges involving nine of the victims.
Class-action suit filed against Canadian banks over mortgage prepayment charges( http://montrealgazette.com/business/class-action-suit-filed-against-canadian-banks-over-mortgage-prepayment-charges )
A Montreal law firm has filed a class-action lawsuit against Canada's major financial institutions over what the suit describes as "abusive" mortgage prepayment charges. The class action, which will need to be authorized by a judge, argues the country's major banks charge unreasonable prepayment fees when Quebec homeowners pay off their mortgage before the end of the term. The suit claims banks include clauses in loan agreements that require people who pay off their mortgages early to pay one of two possible penalties, depending on which is highest: three months' interest calculated on the prepayment amount, or what banks call the "interest-rate differential." The firm behind the class action, LPC Avocat Inc., contends the latter is virtually impossible to calculate and is always the highest.
CREDIT: Ron Carroll, Montreal Gazette

