The slogan is brilliant: "Believe in something. Even if it means sacrificing everything."
The commercial, using former San Francisco quarterback Colin Kaepernick as a new kind of pitchman for Nike, is both brilliant and courageous.
And it matters. If you don't believe it, look at Lance Armstrong, who was able to carry on cheating in the face of doping authorities and lawsuits until Nike pulled the rug out from under him. Nike has real power - and this time, the corporation is using that power the right way.
As the National Football League took the field Sunday for its first full slate of games, it seemed the sports world was talking about nothing else. Even Fox News was forced to report that Nike's sales had surged 31 per cent in the wake of the ad controversy. Let the social media whackos film themselves burning Nike products: Nike and Kaepernick have clearly won this round, a watershed moment at the intersection of sports and social movements that goes back at least as far as the boxer Jack Johnson at the beginning of the 20th century.
The Kaepernick commercial is even big enough to take on, indirectly, the biggest pitchman Nike itself has ever had: Michael Jordan. "Don't become the best basketball player on the planet," Kaepernick intones, as the image cuts to LeBron James. "Be bigger than basketball."
That statement is as clear a signal as you could have that the era of Jordan and Tiger Woods is over, even as Woods continues to struggle against Father Time. Woods and Jordan were great athletes who made hundreds of millions of dollars while refusing to take a stand that might alienate the products they endorse. As Jordan said at the time, "racists wear Nikes too."
It's no longer enough to donate your tax-deductible dollars to a children's charity to burnish your image while refusing to take a political stand. The courage of Kaepernick and Eric Reid and the dozens of others who have chosen to follow them harkens back to the 1960s, to Muhammad Ali declaring that "I ain't got no quarrel with them Viet Congs" before refusing to step forward for the draft when called in Houston.
The step Ali refused to take was surely as big as the step Neil Armstrong took on the moon: a step not taken for all mankind. Kaepernick, acting at a time when his country is divided as it has not been divided since the Civil War, is the legitimate heir to Ali. He is following the example and inspiration of athletes as diverse as Jim Thorpe, Jack Johnson, Joe Louis, Babe Didrikson, Jackie Robinson, Wilma Rudolph, Curt Flood, Tommy Smith, John Carlos and Ali.
Athletes of colour have all, in their various ways, had to face down the mob. This time, Kaepernick and Reid and their fellow athletes are facing an unprecedented opponent, a mob led directly from the White House itself, with Donald Trump himself acting as the spokesperson and head cheerleader for the mob.
The cause they support, the Black Lives Matter movement, is simple. It derives from the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s. By insisting that black lives do matter, the protesters are calling attention to the most basic right of all, the right to go through a simple traffic stop without getting shot and killed.
The phoney, chest-thumping "patriots" who see nothing wrong with using a giant flag to sell everything from used cars to the brutality of the NFL have a huge problem with this most peaceful of protests: Taking a knee. But the athletes who choose to take part aren't attacking the flag or the anthem: They are using their position to speak out, albeit in silence - to call attention to an ongoing national tragedy and the profoundly unjust and racist system behind it.
By tacitly lending its support to the movement, Nike has taken a stand. Behind that stand, without doubt, there was a hard-headed business decision. Kaepernick is seen in a positive light by 70 per cent of consumers under the age of 40 - the demographic that actually buys Nikes, while old fogeys like myself shuffle around in our $19 bargain table specials, muttering about these ungrateful whelps refusing to stand for the anthem.
Those on the wrong side of the great divide will argue that Kaepernick, Reid, Kenny Stills, Albert Wilson, Chris Long and the others who have embraced the movement shouldn't mix politics and sports. But every time a gigantic U.S. flag is trundled out before the anthem and the honour guard representing the various branches of the military marches onto the field, that is a political statement.
For one of the major sponsors behind that commercial and political machine to break ranks by supporting Kaepernick is a watershed moment. This time, Nike is on the right side of history.
Quite beyond the needless controversy, there are messages for young people in that commercial that transcend everything, even politics. "Don't ask if your dreams are crazy," Kaepernick says. "Ask if they're crazy enough."
Crazy enough to challenge NFL owners, crazy enough to challenge the right, crazy enough to challenge a sitting president. Pretty crazy.
jacktodd46@yahoo.com( mailto:jacktodd46@yahoo.com )
twitter.com/jacktodd46( http://twitter.com/jacktodd46 )
CREDIT: Dave Peters, Montreal Gazette



