It's here. The ugly W. Winter. And for a change-up it has made a grand entrance rolling out its ceremonious carpet of snow halfway into November.
Looking out my window on a world of white lawn, trees, and porch, I have three thoughts in sequence: 1 - I hate to say it, but it looks kind of pretty (Okay, I'm over it.) 2 - I want to get out a box of Crayola and colour in the parts. 3 - We always complain about the weather we live in no matter where. (I will now back up my statement.)
When I used to work as an engineer, I entertained clients who visited from the deep south. One time, I rented a van to escort six guys who wanted to see Montreal. (One of them asked me if Canada was part of the United States but that's a whole other topic.) Anyway, that day we had a pretty good snow fall. My takeaway from the tour guiding was this: They were enthralled by the snow; some had never seen any before. Imagine my thoughts while they were raving about how awesome it all looked. (You like it so much, take it all home with you.)
Like some Canadians, I do not ski, ice fish, skidoo, snowshoe, build igloos or trap winter fox. So I don't like winter. But the said southerners loved it because they don't live with it.
I have a friend who moved here from Monterey, Mexico (headquarters of the cartel) and she notes her favourite season is the Montreal winter because it is not a Mexican one - same as Mexican summer, only more rain and gunfire.
Now, you might say a Californian would swear by his climate but they have brush fires instead of snow. (Which would you prefer given only two choices? Don't run off and buy a fire extinguisher too quickly.) My wife and I long ago considered moving to Kelowna on the Left Coast. Granted, it was the poisonous snakes in the lakes and the grizzlies in the forest that turned us off well before we observed that the surrounding area looks like a Hades cook-out practically every year. (Where was I? Oh yeah . . .)
We always dislike a particular season we have to live through. For Canadians, it's winter. For a southerner it's a blistering summer. For someone on the West Coast, it's a dry spell so precarious a spark can set the whole state on fire.
Side bar: It was Charles Dudley Warner who made the famous remark, Everybody complains about the weather, but nobody does anything about it. This was falsely attributed to Mark Twain - his friend.
If snow came but for a few days and you could run out and frolic and then have it all warm back up to 20 degrees C (Canadian) I am sure we would all be like little children in a mud hole. But like an unwelcome guest who doesn't clean up after themselves, it is a pox to the average Canuck. (Even BC has a winter condition called perpetual rain whereby your porch is lusher than your lawn because of the green algai.)
My father always said that it doesn't matter where you live, whatever you gain in one respect you lose in another. Nice to live on the water until the flood line gets to your basement. Nice to live in San Diego at exactly 20 degrees C all year until the mother of all earthquakes turns you into Atlantis.
So, as I stare out on a lawn that makes me start to hum a Christmas tune, I do want to say this on behalf of all (like-minded only) fellow human beings out here: I hate winter. I hate snow. And if the Inuit have 50 names for snow, I have one: #%^* (Notice the snowflake at the end?)
Related
Kramberger: Poll indicates it's time to ice car-shelter bans( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/kramberger-poll-indicates-its-time-to-ice-tempo-car-shelter-bans )
Schukov: My first computer - and my last( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/schukov-my-first-computer-and-my-last )
CP Holiday Train makes its annual ho-ho stop in Beaconsfield Nov. 27( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/cp-holiday-train-coming-to-beaconsfield-station-nov-27 )

