? Liberal leadership hopeful Michael Ignatieff pulled out ahead after the first ballot early Saturday morning, only a few hours after Joe Volpe endorsed second-place candidate Bob Rae Friday night, crossing the floor with his supporters in tow just as the final speech was complete.
Mr. Ignatieff had just finished his presentation when Mr. Volpe began his march and ended in an embrace with Mr. Rae on the convention floor surrounded by a crush of photographers and reporters.
The move was a prelude to a final night of arm-twisting as candidates dispatched organizers to Montreal's bars, hotels and hospitality suites to woo delegates still chewing on the last speeches before the final balloting Saturday.
Campaign sources said Friday night Mr. Volpe decided to endorse Mr. Rae because of his foreign policy, particularly on Afghanistan.
Mr. Volpe had criticized Mr. Ignatieff earlier in the campaign for his strong support of Canada's mission in the troubled country.
In his speech to delegates Friday night Mr. Rae said delivering on "the right" vision of Canada is going to take a lot of work but he is ready to do the job.
"The Liberal Party has succeeded because it has been able to find itself in the heartland of Canada and its values have always tried to reflect the values of Canadians," Mr. Rae said in the speech that he delivered without the aid of notes or a lectern.
He talked about a country where foreign policy is as critical as domestic policy, where poverty is eliminated and pollution is reduced.
Mr. Ignatieff painted a portrait of Canada as the world's leader in environmental sustainability and health care, a country where aboriginals live as equals with the majority population and young people have the biggest dreams and opportunities.
All that is needed for that dream to be true is political leadership - leadership only the Liberal Party can offer, Mr. Ignatieff told his party's convention.
"We are Liberals of a new generation in a new century [and]tonight we have a choice to make.
"Let us choose unity over division. Direction over drift. Courage over fear, and compassion over indifference."
Mr. Ignatieff was the last of the eight candidates to speak as the Liberal leadership hopefuls entered the crucial phase of their campaigns, trying to woo delegates with passionate pleas from the podium.
He asked his party's delegates to "give me the chance to lead you. A chance to inspire. A chance to serve you. I will make you proud. I will give you victory."
Mr. Volpe's endorsement of Mr. Rae was the first movement at the convention, where rumours swirled about which bottom-tier candidates would throw their support to which camp.
The word was out that Ignatieff-Brison stickers had been printed before Scott Brison delivered his convention speech. And that Ignatieff-Hall Findlay stickers had been printed before Martha Hall Findlay gave her speech - reports denied by both the Ignatieff and Hall Findlay camps.
There was consensus that Ms. Hall Findlay had met with all four of the leading contenders - Mr. Ignatieff, Mr. Rae, Gerard Kennedy and Stéphane Dion - and that rewards in return for her support had been discussed.
After Mr. Volpe joined Mr. Rae on the floor he predicted that he would be able to deliver his supporters to Mr. Rae, although only half of his delegates were at the convention.
"I'm obviously very pleased," said Mr. Rae, noting that was also happy to win the backing of some of Mr. Volpe's supporters in caucus such as Massimo Pacetti and Wajid Khan.
"He's going to bring the party together," said Mr. Volpe, adding that Mr. Rae has a vision for the country. "I've said all along that the country needs experience."
Earlier in the campaign, when Mr. Volpe was facing controversy over campaign donations, Mr. Rae seemed lukewarm when a reporter asked how he would react to a Volpe endorsement.
Mr. Rae dismissed the question as hypothetical at that time.
Mr. Volpe's support could bring some delegates to the Rae camp, but it is not clear whether the endorsement could also saddle Mr. Rae with some of Mr. Volpe's political baggage.
Mr. Volpe's campaign suffered a scandal in the spring, when his campaign accepted 20 donations of $5,400 each from five current and former executives of drug-maker Apotex Inc., and their family members - including two donations from 11-year-olds. Mr. Volpe said he would return the donations to those donors.
The speeches started nearly an hour behind schedule following a day of technical challenges and travel difficulties brought about by weather woes. But once the speeches were under way, the packed Palais des congrès was filled with the cheers of raucous supporters.
Mr. Kennedy, who was the third last candidate to speak, said the Liberal Party can win the next federal election only if it concentrates on policies that improve the lives of ordinary Canadians.
Evoking the memory of Pierre Trudeau, underscored by an introduction by the late prime minister's son, Justin, Mr. Kennedy did not wait long before raising his opposition to the motion recognizing the Québécois as a nation.
"This week, many Canadians were made to stop and think about our identity as a country. As Liberals, we've shared different points of view. But though it all, we've never questioned each other's love for our country or our belief in it," he said.
The former Ontario cabinet minister used his speech to cover a lot of bases. Much of it was delivered in French to counteract the criticism throughout the leadership campaign that his lack of fluency would handicap him in Quebec.
He used his status as an outsider to the federal scene to push for new accountability provisions for leaders and to pledge that he could unify the party after more than a decade of fractious rivalries.
Stéphane Dion, who is considered one of the four front-runners tore strips off the Conservative Party and the Bloc Québécois.
Mr. Dion promised, who spoke before Mr. Kennedy to deliver an electoral program that is strong on social justice, economic development and environmental progress, saying it will allow the Liberal Party to win back the hearts of Canadians.
Mr. Dion started his speech by attacking Prime Minister Stephen Harper and the Conservative government's decision to "blindly" commit the Canadian Forces' in Afghanistan until 2009.
"Canada has a prime minister who thinks that the United States is not only our ally, but also our model," Mr. Dion said, accusing Mr. Harper of "mirroring" U.S. President George W. Bush.
Mr. Dion also took aim at the Bloc Québécois, saying Quebeckers can fulfill their aspirations in a united Canada.
To win the leadership, Mr. Dion, who was in fourth place, needed to jump ahead of Mr. Kennedy on the second or third ballot. Mr. Dion's success is linked to his ability to convince delegates that he is more than a competent minister, and that he can actually be a leader with pan-Canadian appeal.
But his speech last night lacked the lustre many delegates felt he'd need to sway supporters and when it ran long, he was cut off by organizers who cued music.
As he arrived at the Palais des congres for his speech, Mr. Dion was accompanied by former minister and ambassador Allan Rock, who praised Mr. Dion's abilities as a politician.
Ken Dryden, who spoke before Mr. Dion, delivered a passionate speech full of hockey references that blasted the Conservatives for taking the country in a narrow and divisive direction.
The former Montreal Canadians goaltender portrayed Mr. Harper as a Prime Minister who is taking the country further right than previous Tory governments.
"Cutting isn't a vision," he said, in a speech typical of his emotional style, complete with a few fist poundings on the podium.
"We're a good country. We have a conscience. We don't like the poor being poor."
Though Mr. Dryden insists he still has a shot at winning, his support is highly coveted by the four front runners. The entire convention gave him a standing ovation, and fourth place candidate Mr. Dion started another midway through Mr. Dryden's speech.
Mr. Dryden has not offered any hints as to who he might support should he not win, and some of his delegates think he might even stay neutral.
Candidate Scott Brison, who spoke before Mr. Dryden, said the Liberal Party should make the fight against global warming its foremost mission in the 21st century.
Mr. Brison said he was committed to making Canada a world leader in clean energy.
"Governments need to go green, and that means buying green, and building green," he said.
Mr. Brison, 39, is the youngest of the eight contenders in the race to replace Paul Martin. A former investment banker who started his first business renting mini-fridges at university, he also served as a senior minister in the Martin government.
In 2003, Mr. Brison ran for the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party. He crossed the floor to the Liberals after he came in last.
Yesterday, he criticized Mr. Harper's Conservatives for abandoning the Kyoto objectives on greenhouse gas reduction and said he supported a tax on carbon emissions, which could subsidize research.
Martha Hall Findlay the bottom-ranking Liberal leadership candidate played up her status as the only woman in the race, hoping to gather support from ex-officio delegates.
"We will be the political movement of the 21st century by being truly inclusive," she said. "Trust me, as a woman standing here before you, I know. We are not yet inclusive enough."
During her 20-minute speech to delegates, Ms. Hall Findlay also reaffirmed her support for a one-tier health-care system and spoke against the motion to recognize "the Québécois" as a nation.
The 47-year-old Toronto telecommunications lawyer garnered the least number of delegates of all eight leadership candidates. She is fighting to keep her leadership bid alive past the first ballot, in which delegates are bound to vote along their declared allegiance lines.
Mr. Volpe, who along with Mr. Dion is one of only two long time Liberal MPs in the race, was the third speaker of the evening: His address played heavily to his Italian immigrant heritage.
First-ballot voting at the Liberal leadership convention was delayed for more than hour Friday because of technical problems accrediting alternates for voting delegates, some of whom were battling freezing rain and sleet to get to Montreal.

