QUEBEC - The left-wing Québec solidaire party( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-solidaire ) has voted to oppose all restrictions on religious symbols in the public sector.
The party, nevertheless, rapidly found itself mired in a fresh controversy when delegates endorsed a second resolution that appeared to open the door to some public workers presenting themselves for duty wearing a niqab or a burka, pieces of clothing that cover the face.
The second resolution nearly overshadowed the overwhelming vote at a QS national council meeting to ditch their traditional support for the 2008 Bouchard-Taylor formula( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/bouchard-taylor-commission ) when it comes to symbols.
The Bouchard-Taylor position was that some restrictions should apply to persons in positions of authority - namely judges, police officers, prosecutors, prison guards, and the speaker and deputy speakers of the National Assembly.
QS defended that line of thinking for years. In 2013, the former QS spokesperson, Françoise David, went so far as to present a bill designed to make the rules law. The bill was never adopted in the legislature.
But QS's support for Bouchard-Taylor went out the window Saturday with a show of voting cards by delegates from across the province, including many anglophones from Montreal.
"The line was drawn today," QS co-spokesperson Manon Massé told reporters shortly after the vote was taken. "Our position will not allow any more exception to this principle: that state secularism is not individual secularism.
"In Quebec, nobody should lose their job or be impeded in exercising their profession of their choice whether he or she wears a religious symbol."
Québec solidaire's decision came in the same week as the Coalition Avenir Québec( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coalition-avenir-quebec ) tabled its own legislation( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/religious-symbols-quebec-to-table-secularism-bill-caq-will-propose-moving-crucifix ), Bill 21( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/bill-21 ), on the issue of secularism that imposes a wide range of restrictions on symbols for authority figures working for the states.
Besides the original list from Bouchard-Taylor, the CAQ adds elementary and high school teachers, principals vice-principals, the complete range of court employees, such as clerks and bailiffs, and the heads of other judicial organizations, such as the Régie du logement and Quebec municipal commission.
For QS delegates, the vote came down to two options, A, which was the Bouchard-Taylor formula or B, "no particular regulations."
Option B ruled the day as delegate after delegate took to the microphone to express themselves in favour of freedom.
"I don't agree the state should be allowed to use its powers of coercion to force people to remove their symbols," one delegate told the crowd. "In reality it divides people."
Some linked the debate to other causes such as the rights of workers and their campaigns against capitalists and big business.
"I am here to defend the right of people to work, to fulfill their dreams to have the job they want," Saint-Henri-Saint-Anne delegate Émilie Perrier-Gosselin told the 300 delegates gathered at a CEGEP Limoilou for the two-day meeting.
"They (in the CAQ) are trying to divide us," added Hull delegate Jessica Squires.
"Give me a break with Islam and the charter of values," Catherine Dorion, the QS MNA for the riding of Taschereau said. "What is threatening our culture is not Islam. It's not the Muslims who are in all our hallways using big money to influence our governments, it's the capitalists who are in bed with our governments."
The QS position resembles that of the one taken by the Quebec Liberals( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/liberals-opt-for-traditional-position-against-ban-on-religious-symbols ), but is more categoric in favour of religious freedoms, leading a number of QS members to boast their party will be the de facto real opposition to the CAQ's vision.
"This is reassuring for our society," said Ève Torres, a veiled Muslim woman who ran for QS in the last provincial election in the riding of Mont-Royal-Outremont after the vote. "From now on QS will be the party that defends everyone without compromising.
"This is no longer the monopoly of the Liberal party. QS is the strong opposition which will strongly defend rights and freedoms for everyone in Quebec."
Delegates who had backed the old formula - who pleaded until the last minute on the plenary flood for their option - said later they were disappointed, but rallied to the majority.
"The reason I backed Option A was because I thought it would have helped educate the population on this issue," said delegate Olivier Huard. "We have taken a position which aims at an ideal."
He said the "risk" in taking such a stand is that QS will estrange itself from the part of population that backs a stricter line on symbols. Polls consistently show public support for restrictions on symbols for authority figures, such as judges and teachers.
Montreal delegate Denise Veilleux, who also was in favour of Option A, said she was disappointed because it would have allowed QS to take a step closer to the point of view of the majority of Quebecers - which is in favour of "real and visible neutrality."
It would also allow QS to take issue with the CAQ's decision to continue subsidizing private and religious schools where Bill 21 will not apply.
But Zachary Williams, who ran as a QS candidate in the 2018 election in the riding of Robert Baldwin, was bursting with pride at the decision.
"Option B sends a really clear message on what we stand for, that we are a party for racial justice and social justice, and we are at the forefront of the fight against racism and inequality," he told the Montreal Gazette.
But the clothing issue also emerged as a hot button issue. Adopted quietly after the hoopla over the symbols motion, it addressed the issue of services being delivered and received with the face visible that the Liberals tried to solve with Bill 62( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/editorials/editorial-bill-62-remains-a-debacle ).
The QS motion says such clothing can be worn as long as it does not impede the worker from completing their tasks, or if there are security concerns, or if the worker tries to convert others to their faith.
While it hands responsibility for policy such as garb over to employers in various ministries and organizations, at no point does it say such clothing - which is in reality non-existent in the public sector - is banned.
The confusion over that new policy prompted the leaders of QS to call the media in for a second news conference, where they tried to clarify what had happened.
"It's false to say the resolution is a green light to clothing covering the face in the public sector," QS MNA and party co-spokesperson Gabriel Nadeau-Dubois told reporters. "On the contrary, is says we can and we must ban covered faces in many situations.
Nadeau-Dubois said he is unaware of a single profession where such clothing would be compatible; certainly not for teachers or anyone in contact with the public.
"There is nothing in this resolution which supports the niqab or the burka, which are things we have no desire to have. It does not say the general rule is the covered face and uncovered face is the exception.
"It is not a wall-to-wall attitude. It is a targeted attitude, but as I said I cannot think of a single situation where it would happen. This is all purely hypothetical. I don't know any women wearing a burka who want to teach. It would be a first in Quebec.
"We are talking about fictitious situations. If you find one, let me know."
There was no immediate reaction from the other parties to QS's shift in positions.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/philipauthier( http://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Related
Editorial: Religious symbols bill is divisive, wrong and unnecessary( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-6bUO )
Religious symbols: Civil liberties, Muslim groups vow to fight Bill 21( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-6c3q )
Religious symbols: Teaching career slipping away for Sikh student( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-6bTN )
Religious symbols: What you need to know about Quebec's secularism law( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-6bR7 )

