In case there was any doubt, Wednesday was a record-breaking day in terms of the heat in the city.
According to Environment Canada, Montreal recorded a high of 36 C as of 4 p.m. That shattered the previous high temperature recorded on May 27 in previous years, which was 30.4 C in 1978, when the Bee Gees were dominating the pop music charts with songs like Stayin' Alive and movies like Grease and Jaws 2 were about to hit the theatres.
On Wednesday, Montreal Mayor Valerie Plante announced the city will be opening 17 cooling stations in various parts of the city this week. The locations include the maison culturelle de Montréal-Nord, maison de la culture d'Ahuntsic, the centre des loisirs Saint-Laurent and the borough hall for the Rivière-des-Prairies-Pointe-aux Trembles. The city has offered an online map of where people can cool off. More info at montreal.ca/articles/le-coronavirus-covid-19
It could be much worse. A different record was set on May 27, 1969 when the temperature only reached the freezing mark, 0 C.
The average high for this time of year is a spring-like 21 C with nighttime lows just below 10 C.
Environment Canada issued a heat warning for the Greater Montreal area, including Longueuil and Laval. The weather service advised that, with the humidex factored in, it could feel like 40 C in some areas. The high humidex values are expected to continue into Thursday.
"Maximum temperatures will remain in the 30s Thursday. However, slightly lower humidity levels are expected to keep humidex values in the 30s. The risks are greater for young children, pregnant women, older adults, people with chronic illnesses and people working or exercising outdoors," Environment Canada noted in its alert. "Heat warnings are issued when very high temperature or humidity conditions are expected to pose an elevated risk of heat illnesses, such as heat stroke or heat exhaustion."
The unusually hot weather began Tuesday when people could be seen lined up outside stores that sell backyard pools. Also on Tuesday, Montreal public health director Mylène Drouin asked the city to open splash pads in the city's parks. Some cities in the West Island said they had no plans to open their splash pads, including Dollard des Ormeaux and Pointe Claire.
Beaconsfield announced it can provide air-conditioned respite, by appointment only, for those vulnerable to extreme heat in a multi-purpose room adjoining its recreation centre. Call 514-428-5999.
The forecast high for Thursday is 30 C with a low of 19 C and showers overnight. Showers are also expected on Friday along with a high of 28 C.
pcherry@postmedia.com
Related
Montreal to open splash pads in parks to help beat heat wave
Montreal is lucky heat wave will be short, public-health physician says

