This post was updated throughout the day on Wednesday, May 27. Questions/comments? ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Camping, cottage rentals, marinas can reopen Monday
Report: Ottawa can't keep soldiers in Quebec CHSLDs until September
Street protests: Montreal health workers decry working conditions
Change of policy in Quebec case, death updates
Quebec vows to train 10,000 new CHSLD workers this summer
Canada must take better care of elderly, Trudeau says
Most CHSLDs are regaining control, but military reports 'difficult situations'
Here's where you can get tested in Montreal today
More below
5:05 p.m. Thanks for reading
That's it for today. Please join me again tomorrow for another live blog.
4:45 p.m. Yes, you can enjoy Montreal this summer
With summer weather suddenly upon us and the coronavirus still on the prowl, you may be wondering about the risks involved with some classic Montreal summer activities and how to minimize them.
We asked two local experts for guidance.
Read our full story, by Michelle Lalonde.
4:40 p.m. Video: Montreal asks landlords to work with tenants who don't want to move because of COVID-19
4:25 p.m. Montreal opens cooling areas, vows to help during moving season
#COVID19: Since the heat wave will last for a few days, the @MTL_Ville is also opening a dozen cooling stations today. The exact list of locations will be announced shortly. They will be open until Friday. #polmtl
- Valérie Plante (@Val_Plante) May 27, 2020
4:15 p.m. Report: Ottawa can't keep soldiers in Quebec CHSLDs until September
NEW: National Defence Minister Harjit Sajjan tells me forces won't be able to deploy for another 4 months in Quebec. "We will not be able to go that duration...when you have our people working 7 days a week it's just not sustainable." Full intv tonight 5pm ET @PnPCBC
- Vassy Kapelos (@VassyKapelos) May 27, 2020
4:10 p.m. Video: Legault reacts to military report on CHSLDs, chides Trudeau on health funding
Premier François Legault today reacted to a report from the Canadian military that detailed serious problems in CHSLDs. Legault asked Ottawa for the military to stay until mid-September to help out.
The premier also chided Prime Minister Justin Trudeau for not providing enough health funding.
Here are some clips from Legault's press conference.
3:55 p.m. Street protests: Montreal health workers decry working conditions
Across Quebec, health workers held protests today to decry working conditions Their slogan: "Dead tired."
Montreal Gazette photographer John Mahoney was at one of the protests.
Health care workers demonstrate outside Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital today.
Intensive care nurse Maryse Tremblay holds up a sign during demonstration by health care workers outside Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital today.
Health care workers demonstrate outside Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital today.
Nancy Savard, an office worker in the radiology department, encourages passing motorists to honk their horns during demonstration by health care workers outside Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital today.
3:45 p.m. Camping, cottage rentals, marinas can reopen Monday
Quebec will allow the reopening of camping, cottage rentals and marinas as of Monday, Tourism Minister Caroline Proulx announced at a press conference this afternoon.
Only one family will be allowed per rental cottage, she said.
Tourist homes and Airbnb rentals can also reopen, but only outside Greater Montreal or in the Joliette region, where the situation remains fragile.
Proulx said Montrealers can go on vacation outside their region but people moving between regions should limit their stops - by bringing their groceries with them, for example.
3:15 p.m. 'Gigantic failure'
In an opinion piece for Ricochet this week, André Noël describes Premier François Legault's management of the COVID-19 crisis as a "gigantic failure."
A former La Presse investigative reporter who later became an investigator for the Charbonneau Commission, Noël picks apart Quebec's strategy, the plan to "reorganize" long-term care homes and the role of Horacio Arruda, the province's top public health officer.
3 p.m. Opinion: Seniors' housing and care need a fundamental rethink
"COVID-19 has put a spotlight on a few things that can and should be addressed, and could serve as an impetus for some fundamental rethinking of what options should exist for seniors, including those who are not fully autonomous."
Read the full op-ed, by Janet Torge, founder of Radical Resthomes/Les maisons solidaires. 2:55 p.m. COVID-19 shows need for long-term-care reform, Trudeau says
Following up on my earlier item about Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's press conference, here's our full story
2:50 p.m. Want to apply to work in a CHSLD?
I reported earlier today on Quebec's plan to train 10,000 people to work in CHSLDs (long-term care homes) between mid-June and mid-September.
Several readers emailed to ask where they can apply.
It's a bit too early. Premier François Legault said Quebec is still preparing to launch the recruitment drive.
"Get ready. In the next few days, we will give you the addresses of the 40 or 50 vocational training centres that will accept applications," Legault said at his briefing this afternoon.
2:40 p.m. New Brunswick says three new cases linked to a health-care worker who travelled to Quebec
Premier says the cases are linked to a medical professional who traveled to Quebec for personal reasons was not forthcoming about their reasons for travel, upon returning to New Brunswick and did not self-isolate.
- Rachel Cave (@CaveRachel) May 27, 2020
NEW: Higgs say a health care worker travelled to Quebec and didn't self isolate on return.
The person met with patients over a two-week period.
Higgs labels it "irresponsible." #NB
- Adam Huras (@adamhuras) May 27, 2020
2:30 p.m. Change of policy on Quebec case, death updates
Since the beginning of the crisis, Premier François Legault has disclosed the number of new cases and deaths at his briefings, offering his condolences to those who have lost loved ones.
That changed today, apparently part of a new communications strategy.
Legault said the figures will now be published in the morning.
"So I won't repeat all the numbers you already have," he added. "I will rather move on to some comments on the general situation."
For the record, Quebec today reported its highest number of deaths in two weeks, though it's unclear how many occurred over the past 24 hours. (See item below timestamped 11:35 a.m.)
2:10 p.m. 'We need more staff in our CHSLDs,' Legault says; Quebec vows to train 10,000 new CHSLD workers this summer
"We need more staff in our CHSLDs (long-term care centres)," Premier François Legault tweeted moments before his briefing this afternoon.
"For those who can help, we can offer you a job that is well paid and very rewarding. I invite you to think about it very seriously."
In his opening statement, Legault added that "the situation remains difficult in CHSLDs."
On the severe staffing shortage in particular, he said: "It's embarrassing for Quebec society" to be in this situation.
To help with the labour shortage in long-term care homes, Quebec will launch a campaign in the coming days to hire 10,000 people to work in them. They will undergo paid training between mid-June and mid-September.
While the training ramps up, Quebec has asked Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to keep military personnel in place as helpers in CHSLDs until Sept. 15, Legault said. About 1,000 soldiers are currently in place.
Legault said the salary will be $760 per week during training. If they are hired full time, they will make $940 per week, he said.
Working in a CHSLD is "a rewarding job that makes a real difference in people's lives," Legault said.
12:30 p.m. Quebec mum on Cirque du Soleil loan
Quebec opposition parties are complaining about a lack of transparency after the province said it would not provide details yet on a possible loan of up to US$200 million to the Cirque du Soleil, which is struggling due to the pandemic.
Read our full story
12:15 p.m. The blockade at Oka provincial park has been lifted
The blockade at Oka provincial park is over, with strict measures in place to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 to the adjacent Kanesatake community.
Read our full story, by Kathryn Greenaway
12:10 p.m. Ottawa provides update
Federal Treasury Board President Jean-Yves Duclos provided an update on the response to the pandemic.
12:05 p.m. Shopping protection
Montreal's Ikea store reopened yesterday, with a limit on the number of customers, among other public health measures. The chain temporarily closed all Canadian stores on March 18.
Masks are de rigueur, as are umbrellas to shield customers from the sun. Montreal is experiencing its first heat wave of the season this week.
Ikea customers use the store's umbrellas to protect themselves from the 34C heat as they wait to enter the store on Wednesday May 27, 2020 in Montreal.
Noon Old Montreal restaurant owners to bang pots, pans in bid to reopen
From The Canadian Press:
Some Montreal restaurant owners took their pots and pans to the streets this morning, demanding answers on when they can reopen their restaurants.
The provincial government allowed retail stores in the city with outside access to resume business this week, but it has yet to announce when restaurants can open their dining rooms.
Earlier this month, a survey conducted by the Quebec Restaurant Association revealed 72 per cent of members wanted to reopen, even if it meant cutting seating capacity in half.
Eric Luksenberg, who owns two restaurants on Old Montreal's Place-Jacques-Cartier, said that without the summer season he won't be able to pay his rent next winter, so he came up with the idea to "make a little noise."
Luksenberg, whose restaurants are Chez Eric and Le Homard Fou, said restaurant workers are paying the price for poor management in the province's long-term care residences, which have seen the worst outbreaks of COVID-19.
Fellow owner Donato Trafficante estimates he lost more than $80,000 in revenue last weekend alone from his two establishments and says if he is unable to open this summer, it could take two to three years to recover.
Jean-Marc Lavoie owns two restaurants in the Old Montreal area and he is worried about their future. He says the pandemic has already forced him to permanently close a third, a Cage aux Sports that relied heavily on tourists.
Read more in our full story
Montreal restaurant owners bang on their pots and pans as they demonstrate to pressure governments to let them reopen their restaurants in Old Montreal today.
11:55 a.m. Most CHSLDs are regaining control, but military reports 'difficult situations'
Following up on previous items about this, here's our full story, by Matthew Lapierre, about the military's report on conditions in Quebec long-term care homes.
11:50 a.m. Aislin
11:40 a.m. Updated charts, maps 11:35 a.m. Quebec reports 541 new cases, 89 more deaths
Quebec has recorded 541 new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to 49,139, the province announced this morning.
There were 89 new deaths reported. The death toll is now 4,228.
That's the highest number of deaths reported since May 13, when 131 were recorded.
Quebec has not said yet how many of the 89 deaths reported today occurred in the past 24 hours.
11:15 a.m. Canada must take better care of elderly, Trudeau says
This item is being updated
At his press conference this morning, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said Canada has to take better care of its elderly. He said he will discuss long-term care with premiers at his weekly conference call with them tomorrow.
Ottawa is in discussions with Quebec and Ontario about their requests to extend the military's assistance in long-term care homes in the provinces, he said.
But he said having soldiers working in the residences is not a long-term solution to the problem.
He said military reports published this week about conditions at residences in Quebec and Ontario show that Canada has to improve how it cares for seniors.
Trudeau also said:
There are more than 45,000 jobs available through the federal online job bank
Certain emergency financial programs will have to end, be phased out or changed. He made the comment when asked whether the Canada Emergency Response Benefit will be extended.
"Our immediate plan is to help out immediately." He was responding to a question about whether Canada needs national standards for long-term care.
He wouldn't comment on whether Canada should follow the lead of New Zealand and consider instituting a four-day workweek.
10:50 a.m. Full report: Military releases findings on conditions at CHSLDs
The Quebec government has released the full report the Armed Forces prepared about the conditions soldiers found when they went into CHSLDs to help.
Military personnel found staffing shortages, improper infection prevention procedures and management problems, among other things.
"The report clearly shows that the arrival of the troops helped stabilize the quality of care and services offered to the most vulnerable elderly people," the Quebec government said.
"Although the situation is improving with the return to work of health personnel who were absent from the network due to COVID-19, the shortage of personnel and manpower remains a significant challenge, in several places, and the Quebec government is continuing its efforts to strengthen the teams on the ground.
"The government of Quebec wishes to once again thank the Canadian Armed Forces for their contribution to this unprecedented health crisis."
Here's the full report.
10:30 a.m. Parc Safari says it hopes to soon open as a drive-through zoo
Parc Safari had to postpone its usual May opening. But plans are afoot to work around the pandemic.
"We hope that soon you'll be able to drive around Safari Adventure with no more contact with other people than at a Tim Hortons drive-through," Parc Safari said in a press release.
"Visitors on safari in the heart of Quebec will discover 300 animals from four continents ... all from the comfort and safety of their own vehicles. This will be possible with limited and safe contact between visitors and staff at only two locations, the ticket office and the public washrooms."
The drive-through safari is inspired by measures taken by the Toronto Zoo.
10:20 a.m. The army's report on CHSLDs will be released to the public today
The Legault government will make public today a report produced by the Canadian Armed Forces on the state of Quebec's CHSLDs.
One day after Ontario released a similar report into the state of some of its long-term care residences, Quebec got its own version late Tuesday evening.
Read our full story, by Philip Authier.
Below is the full report about Ontario long-term care homes.
10 a.m. Quebec campgrounds can reopen Monday
Camping has never sounded more alluring to cooped-up Quebecers, especially since travelling to other provinces or countries will probably be off-limits this summer.
That's why the question of when campgrounds will reopen has come up repeatedly in Premier François Legault's briefings.
Quebec today will announce that campgrounds across Quebec can open their gates to campers starting on Monday, June 1, sources have confirmed to colleague Philip Authier.
At 3:30 p.m., Tourism Minister Caroline Proulx is to explain the rules that will be put in place in campgrounds.
A 2012 survey found that one-quarter of Quebecers go camping every year. That would put the number of campers in the province at more than 2 million.
9:35 a.m. Some national parks reopen on Monday, including two in Quebec
Parks Canada says some operations at national parks, national historic sites, historic waterways and national marine conservation areas will resume starting June 1. Twenty-nine of Canada's 48 national parks will be accessible, including two in Quebec - La Mauricie, near Trois-Rivières, and Forillon in the Gaspé.
9:25 a.m. Saying they're 'dead tired,' nurses will take to the streets of Montreal today
Quebec nurses represented by the Fédération interprofessionnelle de la santé (FIQ) will hold protests outside the province's health centres today to demonstrate their frustration with working conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Read our full story
9:15 a.m. Here's where you can get tested in Montreal today
Montrealers can be tested at free screening clinics across the island.
They are for people who 1) have symptoms or 2) don't have symptoms but have been in close contact with someone who has received a positive COVID-19 test result.
Today, nine testing centres are available across Montreal Island.
Some of the clinics require appointments.
9 a.m. How Quebec compares to the rest of Canada
As of 4 a.m., there were 86,648 cases of COVID-19 and 6,639 deaths in Canada. A total of 45,352 people have recovered.
Here is the breakdown by province and territory:
Quebec: 48,598 (4,139 deaths, 14,999 resolved)
Ontario: 26,191 (2,123 deaths, 19,958 resolved)
Alberta: 6,901 (139 deaths, 6,048 resolved)
British Columbia: 2,541 (161 deaths, 2,122 resolved)
Nova Scotia: 1,052 (59 deaths, 976 resolved)
Saskatchewan: 634 (8 deaths, 549 resolved)
Manitoba: 281 (7 deaths, 269 resolved)
Newfoundland and Labrador: 260 (3 deaths, 255 resolved)
New Brunswick: 122 (120 resolved)
Prince Edward Island: 27 (27 resolved)
Repatriated Canadians: 13 (13 resolved)
Yukon: 11 (11 resolved)
Northwest Territories: 5 (including 5 resolved)
Nunavut: No confirmed cases
8:30 a.m. What's open and closed in Montreal
We are constantly updating our list of
8:30 a.m. Nightly newsletter
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here:
ariga@postmedia.com
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
A timeline of the novel coronavirus in Quebec

