The aircraft rumbles over the sea, banking toward snow-capped cliffs as it makes its final descent toward Salluit.
After a day of easy flying, the crosswinds have come alive, drowning out the sky in an icy fog. But Melissa Haney guides the plane with a cool hand, calm in the knowledge that she's done this hundreds of times.
She's at the helm of a 1991 Bombardier Dash 8 - a plane designed to take off and land on short runways, hit a maximum speed of 515 kilometres an hour while carrying up to 4,000 pounds of cargo, 45 passengers and an assortment of salty snacks.
Even so, as it hovers along the Hudson Strait - where the winds can reach up to 180 kilometres an hour in the winter - any illusion of technology having mastered Quebec's northern frontier disappears.
"This isn't so bad," Haney says. "Sometimes it's so windy we couldn't land even if we tried. Up here, Mother Nature decides when we fly. The sooner you get used to that idea, the better off you and your crew will be."
"This job is special. You're not just flying a plane full of tourists to Mexico to party for a week," says Melissa Haney, the first female Inuk pilot to reach the rank of captain.
The Dash touches down in Salluit as dusk settles over the village, ending a day that began 12 hours, seven landings and 1,854 kilometres ago in Montreal.
As one of Air Inuit's captains, Haney's job is to connect Montreal to the north. A flight from the south can reunite families on the Hudson coast, bring in medicine to a remote Inuit village or drop a shipment of new hockey sticks just in time for a youth tournament.
Each year, there are about 7,000 Air Inuit flights to, from and between northern villages. They carry 150,000 passengers and over 12 million kilos in cargo across the sprawling tundra annually.
For the 12,000 Inuit who populate Quebec's north, the Montreal-based airline is an essential service connecting 14 Inuit villages over a landmass twice the size of England. It's also a lifeline to Montreal itself, where a community of roughly 600 to 1,000 Inuit live at any given moment.
The city's Inuk population is larger than many of the 14 northern communities. Now a grassroots movement is underway to have the federal and provincial governments formally recognize Montreal as an Inuit community.
In essence, to be Inuit in 2019 is to have a foot in both worlds, north and south.
Haney lives that duality.
Melissa Haney is often at the helm of a Bombardier Dash 8 - a plane designed to take off and land on short runways and carry lots of cargo. "Sometimes we take people to bury their loved ones or maybe there was a death in one of the villages and we let everyone off the plane so they can pay their respects."
Tuesday, February 12, 2019, 7:40 a.m., Trudeau International Airport
Betty Tuckatuck is headed north to bury her sister.
"I wish it were different, I wish I was just visiting," says Tuckatuck. "Instead I'm going to say goodbye to someone I love."
Tuckatuck doesn't know much about why her sister Marlene died and she wants answers. She says Marlene went to the nursing station in Kuujjuarapik last week, crippled by a pain in her gut.
Without a doctor in the village, she would have to be transferred to a hospital in Puvirnituq 530 kilometres up the coast or wait for a flight south to Montreal.
"She died on her bathroom floor," Tuckatuck says. "She was waiting for paramedics."
Tuckatuck has been splitting her time between Montreal, where she lives, and her job at the Glencore nickel mine near Salluit.
But today she's heading back to the village where, as a child, she learned to hunt, fish and survive on the icy shores of Hudson Bay. She sits next to her friend Mina and waits to board Air Inuit flight 802 northbound.
The airline began as a sort of pipe dream, an Inuit-owned service founded to connect villages scattered across the northern wilderness. In 1978, Air Inuit's fleet was a single-engine, six-seat bush plane designed to land on water.
Forty years later, the airline runs daily flights from Montreal up the Hudson coast, into Ungava Bay and back down to the city - employing Inuit pilots, air traffic controllers and baggage handlers across the north.
The company's emergence mirrors a demographic explosion in Nunavik. Between 1996 and 2016, the population in Quebec's northernmost region grew by 38 per cent.
During that same period, Canada's population experienced a net growth of just 1.2 per cent.
A young, vibrant Inuit population means more people travelling south to attend college, seek employment or simply try their hand at living in Canada's second-largest city for awhile.
Despite high school dropout rates around three times the provincial average, more Inuit are enrolled in post-secondary education now than at any point in Nunavik's history.
Meanwhile, a growing population means more flights to bring in teachers, nurses, doctors and engineers to help expand services in the north. But funding for this expansion hasn't kept pace with population growth.
Last year, Quebec's ombudsman released a scathing report on housing in the north, saying overcrowded living conditions are making it nearly impossible for Inuit children to succeed in school.
Growing pains notwithstanding, the north is becoming increasingly linked to Quebec's urban south. For someone like Tuckatuck, it's not uncommon to travel up and down the coast a dozen times in the same year.
There are no frills in the northbound gates of the Trudeau Airport, no $5 double espressos or duty-free shops selling Cartier watches to American tourists.
It is purely a functional space. Vinyl-covered seats face vending machines that dispense orange soda and candy bars to hunters dressed in rubber boots and snow pants.
Melissa Haney walks by the gate with a smile on her face, waving at a passenger.
"Hey Melissa!" she exclaims.
Haney is the first female Inuk pilot to reach the rank of captain. She earned her wings in 2017 and has become something of a celebrity in Nunavik. But to her passengers, many of whom remember her from her days as a flight attendant for the airline, she is known simply as Melissa.
"This job is special. You're not just flying a plane full of tourists to Mexico to party for a week," she says. "The other day, we brought a six-day-old baby back (up north) from the hospital (in Montreal)."
Many women still come south to give birth or if their baby is born premature.
"Sometimes we take people to bury their loved ones or maybe there was a death in one of the villages and we let everyone off the plane so they can pay their respects. It takes a little longer but we have to adapt to life in the north."
Camille Lapointe oversees the Dash 8's refuelling. She covers her face to shield it from the wind.
11 a.m., Kuujjuarapik Airport
Haney steps out of the aircraft and takes a deep breath.
"The air is different, it feels fresher, it feels sharper than down south," Haney says. "When you land from Montreal and open the plane door, it feels like you're in a different world."
Just a few hundred metres away, sheets of ice the size of football fields shift and crackle from the Hudson Bay into the sea.
Haney stands under the plane's left wing and places her hand on its propellers, inspecting each blade. The runways in Nunavik don't have the same smooth finish as the ones down south. The surface tends to be covered in gravel and landing on it presents the risk of nicking the Dash 8's propellers or fuselage.
"In many ways, we're a big airline but when we're out here, we do a lot of the heavy lifting ourselves," Haney says.
As Haney inspects the plane, her co-pilot Camille Lapointe oversees the Dash 8's refuelling. Lapointe covers her face with a scarf to shield it from the wind.
On the runway, workers unload crates of food that just arrived from the city, stacking boxes of Kellogg's breakfast cereal, V8 tomato juice and granola bars in a nearby hangar.
The air delivery of food, mail, medicine and essential goods to the north is part of a fragile supply chain that's constantly threatened by poor weather conditions. A whiteout can ground flights, passengers and their precious cargo for days at a time.
Haney recounts one of her first emergency landings. She was a bush pilot, flying hunters in from a camp near Salluit when fog settled over the tundra.
"We had to improvise and wound up finding an abandoned air strip about a mile outside Salluit," Haney says. "There was an old cabin and we settled in, warmed up and ate army rations for awhile."
One of her passengers took them on a trek into the fog and they wound up tracking a herd of caribou, hunting one and harvesting its meat.
"We ate from the land and it was just this really, this incredibly unique experience," Haney says. "When the fog cleared, we packed the plane and brought back enough meat to share with the community."
1:15 p.m., Inukjuak
The aircraft has reached capacity on the last stop before landing near the hospital in Puvirnituq.
Passengers shuffle onto the aircraft with manilla folders full of medical documents, stopping to chat up a cousin or neighbour along the way. Some recognize the flight attendant, Isabelle Nolasco, and they exchange greetings in Inuktitut.
While Haney and Lapointe navigate the skies, Nolesco is the lone flight attendant on board.
Some aspects of that job are indistinguishable from the duties of any flight attendant at a regional airline: safety demonstrations punctuated with graceful hand motions, stowing luggage like Tetris blocks and bribing small children with cookies.
But Nolesco is also trained to assist on medical evacuations for patients urgently requiring surgery in a Montreal trauma centre.
"If the patient is stable, we're generally the ones to take them south," says Nolesco, who has been with the airline for 20 years. "You might see a man who has two broken legs in the back of the flight. We're equipped to carry a baby in an incubator, really any patient that isn't in a life-threatening situation."
"Sometimes we do two, three medevacs a week. It's just a part of the job."
Baggage handlers unload cargo in an Inuit village near the Hudson Strait.
5:50 p.m., Ivujivik Airport
The night wind picks waves of snow off the coast and brushes them past the airfield.
Just as it begins to recede over the horizon, sunlight blends into the icy haze and cloaks the runway in a pale blue fog. For a moment, it looks as though the Dash 8 has landed at the bottom of the sea.
Lapointe stands on a stepladder under the aircraft's right wing, using her exposed hands to fiddle with gauges and the fuel pump. Meanwhile, a baggage handler shines his flashlight into the cargo to help the other two hustle boxes into an idling truck.
The wind is merciless, searing every trace of exposed skin.
"You have to look at it as an adventure, as something so few pilots get to experience," says Lapointe, now 28.
7:50 p.m., Salluit
Haney parks the company pickup in a driveway overlooking the airstrip and helps unload the crew's luggage from the truck into their staff house.
In some villages, Haney stays with friends or family but tonight - after a long day - she'll stay with the other crew members ahead of an early flight back to Montreal in the morning.
The airport in Salluit serves as the mid-point for Haney's loop around the north.
After stopping in seven villages along the Hudson coast, the crew will head back south on the George River route, landing in seven Inuit villages tucked along Ungava Bay, the iron mining town of Schefferville near Labrador, Quebec City and then Montreal.
Some flights head up the George River route from Montreal and back down the Hudson coast the following day.
Her journeys up and down the tundra are one of the ways Haney reconnects with her roots.
Haney was eight years old when her family moved south from Inukjuak. Most of the Inuktitut she could speak has been lost but her bond to the north remains strong.
"Back then, the quality of education you could get up north wasn't so great," says Haney. "So my mom took us south. Maybe it would have been different today. (Nunavik) is still a huge part of who I am.
"When you talk to people down south, they don't know much about how things are up here. They only see the social problems. And those are very real but I get to see the beauty as well.
"When I'm up here, I get to go out on the land, I see family and my close friends. This job allows me to live in both worlds - the north and the south. And that's the reality for more and more people."
Air Inuit flight 820 heading southbound along Quebec's Ungava coast.
Wednesday, February 13, 2019, 7:45 a.m., Salluit Airport: control tower
Yuliusie Papigatuk leans back in his chair and watches the sun rise above fjord. It softens the rocky edges with a pink glow.
On the runway, just a few feet below his desk, a team of baggage handlers load the Dash 8 ahead of its flight to Deception Bay.
Papigatuk looks out for Haney and the other pilots, to keep in touch with the network of control towers along the coast and watch weather patterns that might threaten their flights.
"We get weather in a flash up here," says Papigatuk. "Sometimes the planes won't move for two, three days or even a week during the springtime. ... Once we get strong winds from the north, it'll drown out visibility and flood the runway.
"Sometimes we have to close the airport, the access road and use snowmobiles to get from our homes to here."
Papigatuk says he remembers the first time he saw Haney nearly 20 years ago. Back then, she was still a flight attendant with Air Inuit.
"There was a dog race in one of the communities, so I see this young woman standing on the plane, surrounded by sled dogs," he says. "There were just dogs everywhere and she couldn't help but smile."
Across the room, Elaisa Alaku scrolls through her phone and listens to country music from the local radio station.
Today, she says, is the second anniversary of the day she earned her pilot's licence. Alaku flies Twin Otter planes up and down Ungava Bay for Air Inuit - carrying cargo, passengers and patients between villages.
She says Haney was one of the reasons she chose to move south and attend flight school in St-Hubert.
"She's awesome," says Alaku. "I only sort of remember my first flight: I could feel the adrenaline rushing through my body. It's windy and bumpy up there, there's low visibility sometimes, but when (the sky clears) it's the most beautiful scenery you could imagine."
Alaku's flight pattern, where she pilots a smaller aircraft up and down Ungava Bay, is one of the most gruelling for Air Inuit's pilots.
In some shifts, she will take off and land up to 14 times, linking places like Aupaluk - a village of fewer than 200 residents - to regional hubs like Kuujjuaq - an administrative capital with 2,800 people, a hospital and amenities similar to ones found in most southern cities.
In a few minutes, Alaku will board Haney's plane so she can babysit for her brother in Kuujjuaq that day.
"I'm a full-time pilot, part-time babysitter," she says.
"She's my little love," says Julie Goguen of her 4-month-old, Jamie. "I'm going to see the doctor (in Kuujjuaq) but I can't leave this one. Not for a minute."
10:04 a.m., Quaqtaq Airport
A police officer steps out of the aircraft and returns, moments later, guiding a prisoner by the arm.
"I don't know what he was arrested for, my job is just to get him to Kuujjuaq so he can be detained until his hearing (in Montreal)," the officer says. "That's all I can say."
He turns to the prisoner.
"All the way to the back, please."
"Thank you," the young man replies.
In a few moments, they're walking back up the aisle so the prisoner can use the washroom. They look less like opponents on opposite sides of the law than an old married couple - slightly annoyed with one another but also bound to each other.
A part of flying the Nunavik run means occasionally bringing prisoners south to attend hearings in Montreal, Quebec City or to the detention centre in Kuujjuaq.
Julie Goguen sports a thick parka as she boards the aircraft. Jamie, Goguen's four-month-old, is nestled in a pouch sewn onto her coat. She pokes her head out and looks wide-eyed around the cabin.
"She's my little love," Goguen says. "I'm going to see the doctor (in Kuujjuaq) but I can't leave this one. Not for a minute."
Air travel is a huge part of Goguen's life. Given that Air Inuit is owned by Makivik Corporation - a sort of Inuit co-op created by the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement in 1978 - Nunavik residents can get discounts on up to four flights per year.
Goguen says she uses all of those discounts and tries to fly to Montreal a few times a year so she can visit her family there.
"That's just how it is now. There are Inuit in the south and the north," she says. "This is how we stay connected."
A baggage handler stands over the remains of a polar bear, wrapped in plastic bags.
11:34 a.m., Tasiujaq Airport
On the final stop before landing in Kuujjuaq, a pair of baggage handlers load an unusual package into the hold: the remains of a polar bear that wandered too close to town.
It sits wrapped in plastic, splayed between hockey bags and crates of mail, bound for Quebec City.
Neither of the handlers can say why it's headed to the provincial capital.
With climate change effectively shrinking their habitat, it isn't uncommon for bears to wander into villages. Locals try to avoid killing them when possible but polar bears can be extremely aggressive.
To live in the north, one of the handlers says, is to have a much closer relationship to the land and everything that lives off it. Often that relationship is of the predator, prey variety.
"You're not in the city anymore," one of the baggage handlers says. "Up here we don't play with our food."
12:20 p.m., Kuujjuaq Aiport
Haney walks into the employees lounge and brews a pot of coffee for her co-workers.
As she sits down to a cold chicken sandwich, someone from the airport hands her a clipboard.
"Human remains," the woman says.
Haney signs the document and gets back to her lunch. For its last three legs into Montreal, Air Inuit flight 820 southbound will carry a body so that it can be unloaded, delivered to the morgue and examined by the Quebec coroner's office.
There is no information about why it will need to undergo an autopsy. And perhaps, for the crew, it is better that way.
"Sometimes the coffin is really small and you know it belonged to a child," says Nolasco. "Those are hard."
Nunavik and its villagers are tied by blood, marriage and friendships that go back generations. A death in one village reverberates across the north.
"There is an incredible sense of community up here," Haney says. "To see the way people in a village care for one another in their grief, is ... it's not something you see in too many places."
Given the extreme weather conditions, accidental deaths are far more common in Nunavik than they are in the south. One study, by Université Laval, found that accidents account for 11.5 deaths per 10,000 residents compared with 3.0 per 10,000 in the rest of the province.
And then there is the suicide crisis.
Last year, Kuujjuaq was rocked by a wave of suicides that forced an emergency meeting with community leaders from across Nunavik and representatives from the Quebec government.
There is hope in the north but the legacy of residential schools, underfunded social programs and the forced relocation of Inuit from the land into settlements has left a deep wound in its wake.
"You can't help but see some of the problems and want to help and want to be a force for good," Haney says.
8:11 p.m., Trudeau International Airport
The Dash 8 glides into Montreal just as a blizzard makes one final push over the city.
It is the 15th time Haney will land the aircraft in under 36 hours - an exhausting feat for even the most experienced pilot. This time, she'll navigate the tail end of a storm that has delayed dozens of flights coming in and out of Dorval.
"I don't even want to think about how much snow is on my car," Nolesco says. "That's the real challenge."
In a few minutes, the crew will see the last dozen passengers off, clean the aircraft, finish their paperwork and go home to their families. Haney, who lives in the Eastern Townships, says she can't wait to kiss her two children goodnight and take a warm shower.
Lately, Haney says, she's been taking on less flying and focusing on a role in management at the airline. She wants to continue mentoring Indigenous youth and women who may not know that a career in aviation is possible.
"When I started out as a flight attendant, I didn't even realize becoming a pilot was an option," Haney says. "But you start working these routes and you fall in love with the job. I knew right away I wanted to be in aviation for the rest of my career.
"Now we're seeing more and more Inuit getting their pilot's licence, taking the steps to be a part of something greater than all of us. I'm proud to be a part of that.
"As a pilot, you're not doing anything heroic or special but you play a role in connecting these communities to the south and to each other. You look at yourself as a tiny part of this great big northern territory and you're humbled."
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/titocurtis( http://twitter.com/titocurtis )
Related
Suicide crisis: Family wants state of emergency declared in Nunavik( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/suicide-crisis-family-wants-state-of-emergency-declared-in-nunavik )
This Wolf Pack prowls with socks, sandwiches and smiles( https://montrealgazette.com/news/the-wolf-pack-street-patrol )
This is Salluit: A future of hope( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/salluit-this-was-salluit )

