Appearing in Le Bulletin des Agriculteurs for 60 years, the man behind Onésime was unknown outside the province
? At first glance, an illustration by Quebec artist, Albert Chartier, could easily be mistaken for a Norman Rockwell. The pastoral charm and simplicity are present in the works of both artists, but upon closer inspection a distinctly Canadian point of view appears in the illustrations by Mr. Chartier. His favourite themes were hockey, skiing and the customs of rural Quebec.
Unrecognized outside his home province, Mr. Chartier entertained six decades of readers with his comic strip . A skilled draftsman with a knack for storytelling, was the continuing adventure of a henpecked man with a sour-looking face who was dominated by his wife, Zénoide. With a supporting cast of family members, Onésime's foibles were documented in the monthly magazine Le Bulletin des Agriculteurs.
Although he insisted that he never intended to create a portrait of Quebec through his comic strip, in an interview with Montreal's Drawn and Quarterly magazine, he remarked that he tried to make Onésime typical of his place and time. He named the chinless pipe-smoker who looked down his nose through his pince-nez after one of his uncles. "And I borrowed many of his expressions from friends and relatives . . . I made a point of doing that. I really wanted to record specific expressions and a way of talking that you hardly hear any more."
Albert Chartier was born in the working-class Plateau Mont Royal neighbourhood on June 16, 1912. After a brief and suffocating stint at the L'École des Beaux Arts de Montréal, Mr. Chartier opted for a career as an illustrator. During the Prohibition movement in the United States, when Montreal's reputation as a city of excess attracted Americans to the city's bars and cabarets, Mr. Chartier earned a living selling drawings of popular jazz musicians to tourists.
His first published work was Bouboule, a comic strip he collaborated on with journalist René Boivin, which was featured in the daily La Patrie from 1937 to 1938. At the same time, he started a society magazine called Can-Can. Mr. Chartier would abandon the magazine after his collaborator, Martin Tessier, died during the Second World War.
In 1940, he married Suzanne Martel and they moved to New York City where he worked for the Columbia Comic Corp., and Big Top Comics. During the war, he returned to Canada and illustrated for the Federal Wartime Information Board creating panel gags for the troops.
His much-loved first appeared in 1943 in what was the subscription-only publication of Le Bulletin des Agriculteurs. The setting for strip was in St-Jean-de-Matha, around Lac Noir, where the Chartiers and their children eventually settled. The humour in the comic strip is burlesque and vaudevillian. Many of the jokes are played out against a backdrop where extreme weather, a hockey match or the Catholic Church influences the behaviour of the characters.
Mr. Chartier's talents as a draftsman are ever present in the wonderfully choreographed panels of . The style is reminiscent of comic strips like and . The quality of his pen and ink cross-hatching is superb. Dazzling renditions of the changing seasons: apple blossoms, flash floods, fall foliage and blinding blizzards were masterfully portrayed. Readers adored Mr. Chartier's comic strip. Year after year, polls showed it was the magazine's most popular feature.
Chris Oliveros, publisher of Drawn and Quarterly, described Mr. Chartier's association with the Bulletin as both a blessing and a curse. In its heyday, Mr. Oliveros estimates that the Bulletin had some two million readers, but it limited Mr. Chartier's exposure to the world outside of rural Quebec. In spite of a lack of recognition, Mr. Chartier's talent was in constant demand. Throughout the 50s and 60s the artist was frequently commissioned by La Presse and the Montreal Star to design the Rockwellesque covers that appeared on their weekend inserts. He also held a teaching position at the École des Arts et Metiers Commerciaux in Montreal from 1967 to 1977.
Although his regional celebrity never resulted in international kudos, his rural following did provide him with the opportunity to live the life of a country gentleman. He spent his days doing what he loved best: drawing and painting and cultivating his sense of humour. Ultimately, for Mr. Chartier, fame was less important than the work itself. During the Drawn and Quarterly interview he insisted that when a person is passionate about developing their talent it doesn't feel like work at all. "I mean, sure it's work, but it isn't hard labour. Despite the difficulties and the effort, it's still a pleasure. And in the end I believe in that pleasure."
He died on Feb. 21.

