Seriously, should we have expected anything else in Johnny Manziel's Canadian Football League debut with the Alouettes?
Manziel, acquired in a stunning five-player trade from Hamilton on July 22, made his much-anticipated debut Friday night and was forced to eat humble pie.
Manziel, the first freshman to win the Heisman Trophy and a former first-round draft choice of the Cleveland Browns, saw his first CFL pass intercepted. He had three more pilfered before the opening half ended.
In short, the Tiger-Cats, his former team, made him look like the raw rookie that he is. The Als were eviscerated 50-11 before 18,576 Molson Stadium spectators in what is becoming a familiar theme for this team.
Montreal hasn't won a home game since last Aug. 11 and is now on a four-game losing streak. It saw its record drop to a league-worst 1-6. Had the Als won, they would have moved into a three-way tie for second place in the weak East Division.
Instead, one has to wonder if the Als will win another game this season?
The Ticats also were on a three-game losing streak, but Montreal proved to be the perfect antidote for a team that has been experiencing its own offensive troubles. Hamilton improved to 3-4 and solidified its hold on second place in the division. The Ticats trail division-leading Ottawa by two points.
The Als, who revamped their defence through free agency over the winter, have now allowed a league-high 242 points in seven games, including 94 in the last two. One must wonder whether there will be any repercussions for defensive co-ordinator Rich Stubler.
Oh yes, the Als have scored 103 points.
Alouettes quarterback Johnny Manziel throws against the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in Montreal on Friday, August 3, 2018.
Manziel's agent, Erik Burkhardt, along with former CFL quarterback Matt Dunigan were among the many who questioned head coach Mike Sherman's decision to start Manziel on two weeks' practice. Burkhardt called the decision "insane."
While Sherman insisted this was a football and not a marketing decision, he could never have fathomed how quickly things would deteriorate for Manziel and his team. Sherman believed Manziel knew enough of the playbook to be competitive. And he figured the 25-year-old might have an advantage, being familiar with Hamilton's defence.
But with the Als already trailing 7-0, after the visitors opened the game with a six-play, 79-yard drive - capped by a 17-yard touchdown pass to Brandon Banks - Manziel's first pass, on second down, was thrown directly into the hands of middle-linebacker Larry Dean at the Montreal 12-yard line.
Three plays later, Alex Green scored on a one-yard run. The game wasn't even six minutes old, and the Als already trailed, 14-0.
Things continued to deteriorate.
The Als were held without a first down on their next series. Kicker Boris Bede had his punt blocked by Curtis Newton. It was recovered by Sean Thomas-Erlington, who played collegiately at Université de Montréal. He returned it 10 yards for a touchdown and a 21-0 lead.
The game was barely eight minutes old.
On Montreal's next possession, Manziel scrambled and attempted a pass for tailback Tyrell Sutton. But the ball deflected and was intercepted by cornerback Jumal Rolle at the Hamilton 48.
Ticats quarterback Jeremiah Masoli, whose play made Manziel expendable, required only four plays for a fourth touchdown. He passed 21 yards to Jalen Saunders at 11:09, increasing the lead to 28-0.
When any team's trailing by four touchdowns, it becomes difficult to assess the play of a quarterback. But Manziel certainly isn't boring. He is elusive and can escape the rush. And he throws a good, strong ball - when it's on target.
He got the Als' offence moving at the end of the first quarter. He passed 10 yards to Ernest Jackson and 12 to Eugene Lewis. Sutton ran for 17, but the drive stalled. Bede, who missed three field goals last week, against Edmonton, kicked a 30 yarder on the opening play of the second quarter.
The Als seemed to have a spark moments later, when safety Dominique Ellis intercepted a pass that was deflected. But three plays later, Montreal gambled on third down. Manziel's pass was underthrown and easily intercepted by Rolle.
The Ticats immediately went on an eight-play, 83-yard drive - thanks to a 17-yard run by Green, a 19-yard pass to Luke Tasker and a 31-yard gain to Saunders. Green eventually scored on a one-yard run at 8:17, making it 35-3.
Hamilton Tiger-Cats defensive end Justin Capicciotti (94) and linebacker Simoni Lawrence (21) celebrate a pass interception as Alouettes quarterback Johnny Manziel (2) looks on during first quarter CFL football action in Montreal on Friday, August 3, 2018.
Still, at times, Manziel was brilliant.
On the Als' next possession, he found Lewis for a 21-yard gain. Three plays later, although Lewis was well covered and Manziel only had a small window in which to complete a pass, he did so, finding Lewis for 31 yards.
Following a six-yard sweep by B.J. Cunningham, the Als were at the Hamilton 14. Manziel then attempted a poor throw that was intercepted by safety Mike Daly.
Lirim Hajrullahu kicked a 42-yard field goal in the final minute of the opening half, sending the teams to their dressing rooms with the visitors comfortably ahead, 38-3.
Hajrullahu added a 48-yard field goal five minutes into the third quarter. Early in the fourth period, the Ticats went 97 yards on nine plays, culminating in Masoli's six-yard touchdown run.
Vernon Adams, who started last week, against the Eskimos, replaced Manziel with 12:52 remaining in the game. Adams scored on a one-yard run at 12:21.
Montreal's next game is Aug. 11, at Ottawa.
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com( mailto:hzurkowsky@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1( http://twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1 )
Related
Enough talk. It's time to see what Johnny Manziel can do on the field( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/enough-talk-its-time-to-see-what-johnny-manziel-can-do-on-the-field )
Als' Johnny Manziel 'excited, not nervous' ahead of first CFL start( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/als-johnny-manziel-excited-not-nervous-ahead-of-first-cfl-start )
Zurkowsky: Johnny Manziel storm is about to hit Montreal full force( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/the-johnny-manziel-storm-is-about-to-hit-montreal-full-force?video_autoplay=true )
Zurkowsky: Johnny Manziel humbled after bad loss, but showed a spark( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/zurkowsky-johnny-manziel-humbled-after-bad-loss-but-showed-a-spark )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

