The other day, I pulled out my Dad's old fedora to see what I looked like in a FBI agent Eliot Ness hat. It was then that I realized, in every generation, a guy's head size quadruples.
It teetered on the top of my head like the snow on Mount Fuji. I estimate by the year 2100, all men's noggins will be the size of Stewie's on Family Guy. (It might be something an agrochemical corporation is putting in the wheat.) By then, we will all walk hunched over and suffer severe spinal problems but not feel it because we will all be chewing cannabis gum. (Doctor's will tell us it is good for us.) Also, we will be wearing 100 gallon hats just to keep from getting sun stroke from global warming. (God knows, how low our cargo jeans will ride by then; they will probably drag a half a block behind us.)
It doesn't seem that long ago, men went from suits and fedoras to jeans and baseball caps (worse, worn backwards like you don't want nape burn.) just to go out to buy cigarettes - In those days, doctors recommended smokes as extremely beneficial for good digestion, and totally healthy for you. (Until it was disproven. You know, like one day we will wake up and realize cell phones have turned us into phosphorescent microwaved TV dinners that pick up FM stations in our collar bones.)
Where was I? Oh yeah. You look at all of those black and white photos - before colour was invented - and see all the guys wearing these cool Dick Tracy (for the benefit of Generation Now - a vice-president in the 1930s) hats while crowding Bonnie and Clyde's bullet riddled V8 Ford. (It was beige, but you couldn't tell by the picture.)
These days, you don't see many hats unless you go to Texas where even the cattle wear Stetsons. (Is felt a form of leather?) When is the last time you saw a lady wearing a pillbox or a Roaring Twenties Cloche at No Frills? Or a guy in a bowler like in The Avengers (the British detective duo not what you see at Comicon.)
I miss hats. How neat (pardon the foul language) would it be to see everyone expressing themselves with headdress designs like Pilgrim hats, Royal Guard bearskins, sombreros, coonskin caps, and beanies? (I liked the ones with propellers on top.) I admit, it would be hell watching a movie in a theatre.
I think politicians should be forced to wear hats appropriate to their stature: Dunce caps. I think people in bars should wear party hats to fit the mood; tougher bars should hand out flying-bottle-proof helmets.
You wonder why hats went out of fashion. (OK, only I wonder. You probably don't care.) Maybe hats don't look good on a Buddhist style head shave - a popular hair(less) trend these days. Actually, I used to wonder why people don't wear hats anymore until I recently bought a really expensive, beautiful fedora (size 1300) and proudly put it while walking along the river. A gust of wind immediately swooped it off my head and blew it all the way into the drink.
(Note to local boaters and fishermen: If you see my hat, can you please return it to me, care of the West Island Gazette( https://montrealgazette.com/category/news/local-news/west-island-gazette ). I am offering a generous reward, as there is no price too high when it comes to spiffy fashion.)
I miss my hat.
Related
More from Victor Schukov, Special to the Montreal Gazette( https://montrealgazette.com/author/victor-schukov-special-to-the-montreal-gazette )
Kramberger: Room for improvement in revised flood maps( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/kramberger-room-for-improvement-in-revised-flood-maps )
Tomkinson: Looking for a budget-friendly way to buy? Choose a home with a rental suite( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/off-island-gazette/tomkinson-looking-for-a-budget-friendly-way-to-buy-choose-a-home-with-a-rental-suite )

