On April 14, 1969, the Montreal Expos played their first-ever home game, at Jarry Park. Among the 29,184 baseball fans who flocked to see the Expos take on the St. Louis Cardinals was Premier Jean-Jacques Bertrand. Len Sidaway's photo of the Expos-cap-wearing Union Nationale premier appeared in the Montreal Gazette the following day, along with copious coverage of the milestone event.
Bertrand had taken office after the sudden death of Premier Daniel Johnson Sr. in late 1968. He served until losing the 1970 election to Robert Bourassa's Liberals.
Bertrand had the honour of tossing out the first ball. He was booed by the crowd, we reported.
The Expos, however, were instant favourites.
"Given a goose-pimply ovation before the game and cheered lustily throughout the city's big league baseball baptism, the Expos surged into a 6-0 lead and blew it and came back as they did in the season opener," we wrote. (They had played six away games to start the season.) The final score was 8-7 for the Expos.
Mack Jones and Coco Laboy starred. Laboy particularly relished the victory over the Cards; he had languished in their farm system without ever getting the chance to play for them, we noted.
The win went to pitcher Dan McGinn, who had come in in relief of starter Larry Jaster after the fourth inning. The Expos committed five errors.
After the game, team owner Charles Bronfman "had to struggle though a back-slapping crowd to reach his car. John McHale was besieged for autographs. Every Expo became an instant hero and Mack Jones broke in as the idol of the cheap seats with his three-run homer in the first inning," we recounted. (McHale was president of the Expos.)
Meanwhile, St. Louis outfielder Curt Flood was blasting the condition of the field, we reported. Frost pushing from underneath the surface of the field had given it a soft, bumpy consistency. The infield was soft and the outfield was rough. "It's tough to figure out which way the ball is going to bounce," Flood said, declaring it the worst diamond he'd ever played on.
The Expos played at Jarry Park until moving to the Olympic Stadium in 1977. It was their home until the end of the 2004 season, after which the team was moved to Washington and became the Nationals.
The uncropped photo.
Related
History Through Our Eyes: View previous photos( https://montrealgazette.com/category/news/local-news/history-through-our-eyes )