We should preface this item by noting if complaining about snow-clearing isn't the favourite winter pastime of Montrealers, it's certainly among the Top 10.
With that said, it would have been hard to accuse anyone in the city of garden-variety whining following the inauspicious first winter of snow-clearing under the then-recently elected administration of Mayor Valérie Plante.
It was, to be sure, a brutal, vexing winter, alternating between heavy snow, rain and everything in between. But it was also painfully evident the new administration's lack of experience exacerbated matters.
Mother Nature vs. city hall came to a head in late January following a particularly copious snowfall hardened by freezing rain, the kind of treacherous weather cocktail that had many of us slipping, falling and hurting ourselves.
Unavoidable? Perhaps. But the city did its residents no favours by refusing to clear the snow from that huge storm, incorrectly predicting a forecast mild spell would thaw everything, negating the need for an expensive city-wide snow-clearing operation (estimated to cost as much as $20 million per storm).
The public outcry over the city's ill-advised delay was loud and sustained, to the point where Jean-François Parenteau, the executive committee member in charge of snow-clearing, made a public admission of error, apologized and reversed course( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-to-start-snow-removal-sunday-night ), ordering the snow to be cleared, albeit several days after the epic storm. (And, it's worth noting, following a public spat with Anjou borough Mayor Luis Miranda( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-administration-takes-heat-over-icy-sidewalks ), who ignored the city's directives and cleared the snow for his 46,000 constituents.)
For her part, Plante pleaded extraordinary circumstances - a snow crisis( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-snow-crisis-more-like-snow-fiasco ), as she put it - and pledged to do better on the snow-and-ice- clearing front (in part by authorizing boroughs to purchase their own "croque-glace" machines - essentially ice-crushers).
Postscript: Winter 2 of the Plante administration is upon us. Time, and weather, will tell if it learned from its shaky debut.
Related
Step through the looking glass to 2018 Year in Review( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/2018-year-in-review )
The year in review: The best previously unpublished pictures of 2018( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-5W5k )

