Just hours after the Kanesatake youth centre burned to the ground Sunday, Grand Chief Serge Simon vowed to rebuild a bigger, better facility in its place.
The fire started sometime after 11 p.m. Sunday. Simon said his wife roused him from bed late that evening in a panic.
"She said 'The youth centre is on fire, the youth centre is on fire!' So I threw on some shorts and ran out the door," said Simon, the grand chief of the Mohawk Council of Kanesatake.
"I could see the flames from my house. ... When I got within a few hundred feet of the building, I could barely stand the heat."
There is no fire department and there are no fire hydrants on the Mohawk territory, which depends on a volunteer service from Oka and nearby farming communities.
By the time firefighters arrived on the scene, the building was completely ablaze, according to Oka mayor Pascal Quevillon.
"It was an electrical fire, there's no reason to suspect arson," Quevillon told the Montreal Gazette.
Had they found evidence of arson, the Oka fire department would have handed the investigation off to the Sûreté du Québec.
News of the blaze spread quickly over social media Sunday night.
"I really hope this was not deliberately set," wrote Kanesatake resident Cheryl McDonald. "The youth centre was one of the few safe places for the kids to all come together. May this tragedy be the bang that wakes up and unites Kanesatake."
Simon said someone tried to set fire to the youth centre four years ago. There have been high-profile cases of arson on the Mohawk territory in recent years.
Vandals set fire to the abandoned police station in 2015, and someone burned down an administrative building next to the local gym two years prior to that.
When reached for comment early Monday, Simon said he was "99 per cent sure" someone set the youth centre on fire.
Perhaps the most infamous local arson dates back to 2004, when then-Grand Chief James Gabriel brought in 50 outside police officers to seize the local peacekeeper station. Gabriel said he was attempting to root out local corruption and raid local cannabis farms.
In the end, a small but militant resistance formed around the peacekeeper station - trapping Gabriel and the officers inside. During the ensuing standoff, a handful of local men set fire to Gabriel's house.
The Kanesatake youth centre is next to a field that sprawls into the nearby pine forest.
Local kids used the youth centre as a meeting point, a place to hang out, skateboard and play video games. Aside from a federally-funded after school program and the youth centre, there are almost no local activities for Mohawk teenagers.
Funding for the Shakotihenté:se after school program - designed to keep kids from joining gangs - expires in September.
"These kids have so much potential, but if they're not given the chance to go out and learn things and be in a safe space, they won't get very far," said Sandra Harding, who helps run the program.
The building that houses the youth centre is insured, and Simon said the Mohawk council will erect a "bigger, better and more secure" one in its place.
"We're going to look and see if we can get in-kind contributions from the provincial or federal government," Simon said. "We may as well take this as a chance to rebuild something our youth can be proud of."
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/titocurtis( http://twitter.com/titocurtis )
Related
Kanesatake after-school program: 'We can't afford to lose this'( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/kanesatake-after-school-program-we-cant-afford-to-lose-this )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

