What if politicians looked to First Nations as an asset to Quebec's economy?
Since the beginning of the provincial election campaign last month, Chief Ghislain Picard has been dogging Quebec's party leaders with that question.
While the province is aging itself out of the labour market, there aren't enough skilled workers to replace them. Given that 55 per cent of Quebec's 140,000 Indigenous people are under 25 years old, it would seem logical to tap into that growing segment of the population.
Picard has been relentless on this point for weeks and it appeared to finally pay off Monday during the second leaders' debate.
"The labour shortage (in Quebec) is real and there are real ways to address it: First Nations, for example," Parti Québécois leader Jean-François Lisée said at the debate.
Liberal Leader Philippe Couillard reiterated the point.
"Yesterday, I had the pleasure of seeing two party leaders finally recognize that we have an active, young population and we're ready to work," said Picard, Chief of the Assembly of First Nations Labrador-Quebec.
"First Nations are finally part of the conversation ... but we need more than just words."
While there is vast potential for Indigenous youth in Quebec, the living conditions on some remote First Nations are abysmal; education is chronically underfunded, housing shortages are rampant and access to health care is a consistent problem.
Lisée has committed to meeting with Picard and chiefs from across the province within the first 100 days of forming government.
"If we're going to come up with solutions it'll have to be together," Lisée said. "These aren't just meetings to say hello; we'll sit down and start to see how we can tackle these problems."
Lisée, in particular, has drawn praise from Picard. The PQ leader was the first to accept his invitation to a chiefs summit and has put his weight behinda clean energy project that could create 400 jobs on the Innu territory.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec-election-for-the-innu-wind-farm-is-a-chance-to-repair-old-wounds )
He's also spoken out against new hydro electric dams that would flood and destroy large swaths of Indigenous hunting grounds. He's attacked Coalition Avenir Québec Leader François Legault for supporting new dam projects.
"Legault thinks he can just build dams on (Indigenous territory) and be greeted positively? Good luck with that," Lisée said Tuesday. "He's insulting First Nations."
Earlier in the campaign, he said a PQ government would look into establishing a parliamentary commission on high suicide rates and the housing crisis in Quebec's 14 Inuit villages.
So far, though, the PQ leader hasn't set aside any concrete promises or real political capital to back the talk.
"I know a priority, for Chief Picard, is making sure First Nations are a part our solution to the labour shortage," Lisée said. "Now how do we get that done and what are the right projects? Well we have to develop that together.
"We'll have 100 days, after forming the government, to get prepared and we plan on being ready."
There are reasons to be hopeful for Indigenous youth in Quebec. More First Nations and Inuit are enrolled in the province's universities than ever before.
Increasingly, children who grow up in the Inuit territory are learning French, English and Inuktitut.
Mayors in Quebec's faraway cities are also looking to the young, growing Indigenous population in nearby reserves to help address their labour shortages.
A few mayors lobbied the PQ leader at a meeting in Quebec City last week and raised the prospect of training programs for Indigenous youth.
But this opportunity requires an investment in education, crime prevention and a variety of health resources that don't exist in these communities. Though much of this funding comes from Ottawa, Quebec plays a role as well.
"I've met with (some) communities. In Abitibi, there's innovative projects that partner Sûreté du Québec officers and Indigenous police," Lisée said. "Those are great projects. But the challenges vary from community to community and the only way to sort that out is to meet."
In other words, there's little in the way of costed, verifiable promises.
Any conversation about labour and the economy starts with an even tougher conversation about land rights, Picard said, in a nod to the difficulties that lie ahead.
"But first, we just have to talk."
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/titocurtis( http://twitter.com/titocurtis )
Related
Read more of our 2018 Quebec election coverage right here( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-elections )
Can't get enough of Quebec politics? Join our Facebook group( https://www.facebook.com/groups/TheQuebecBureau/ )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

