Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce Mayor Sue Montgomery has been expelled from her party, Projet Montréal announced Friday afternoon.
But the mayor of Montreal's largest borough is refusing to stand down without a fight.
The party of Mayor Valérie Plante said Montgomery was expelled because she refused to remove a member of her staff accused of psychological harassment.
The expulsion stems from an investigation by the city's comptroller general( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/report-finds-cdn-ndg-borough-employees-suffered-harrassment ) that found employees within Montgomery's borough administration had been harassed by a member of Montgomery's staff.
"Following the report of the investigation of the city's human rights division, that concluded that there were serious behaviours comparable to psychological harassment toward two employees of the borough of Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, the comptroller general of the city put in place immediate measures and submitted recommendations aimed at avoiding any types of psychological harassment," the mayor's office said in a statement.
Officials with Plante's office would not divulge the name of the accused, saying it was a human resources matter, but sources within the party confirmed the accusations were against Annalisa Harris, Montgomery's chief of staff, who was hired last June.
The recommendations to dismiss Harris were given to Montgomery, who "has the legal obligation to take the necessary measures in order to stop the behaviours and protect the employees concerned," the statement reads. The cabinet of Mayor Plante demanded that Montgomery follow the recommendations, but "Montgomery has chosen to contest the validity of the report and its conclusion, and has openly refused to apply the recommendations of the comptroller general. This led to her expulsion from caucus."
In a statement Friday, Montgomery said she was "very disappointed" the party had removed her.
"I was democratically elected and will continue to work hard to serve the people of CDN-NDG," she said. "I will stay as mayor. But they have kicked me out of the party."
Montgomery said neither she nor Plante has seen the comptroller general's report. She said she was being asked to fire someone without having seen the evidence.
"I would be the last person to condone harassment. I will also not condone lack of due process," Montgomery said. "We live in a democracy where people have a right to see evidence against them and to defend themselves. This has not happened and I cannot accept it. It would be irresponsible for me, or any employer, to fire someone without seeing evidence and giving that employee a chance to correct any unacceptable behaviour, if any existed."
Montgomery can stay on as mayor but would sit removed from her party in city council and will no longer take part in party sessions. Her departure leaves Projet Montréal with 35 seats on the 65-seat city council.
In a tweet, Montgomery countered the mayor's office's version of events, saying she was the one to call for an investigation "because it was brought to my attention there were morale problems among city employees."
I want to correct the record in PM's release. I was the one who initiated the investigation because it was brought to my attention there were morale problems among city employees. #truth( https://twitter.com/hashtag/truth?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw ) #justice( https://twitter.com/hashtag/justice?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw ) #transparency( https://twitter.com/hashtag/transparency?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
- suemontgomery (@MontgomerySue) January 24, 2020( https://twitter.com/MontgomerySue/status/1220841753248399362?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
In the city statement, Plante said despite "numerous interventions from my cabinet and myself asking Ms. Montgomery to accept to apply the recommendation of the comptroller general, it must be recognized she is refusing to conform.
"I have a zero-tolerance policy in matters of harassment and that goes for elected officials, political staff and all the employees in our public service," she said. "In another era, politicians preferred to close their eyes or to hide under the carpet similar situations in order to avoid paying a political price. I do not share that way of doing politics. ... All reprehensible acts require an intervention, no matter the party or the post occupied by the person that committed it."
In its explanation of the investigation, the city says the comptroller general's office received information saying that the accused exhibited behaviours "comparable to psychological harassment" toward two employees at the borough. The employees did not themselves lodge a complaint. Investigators spoke with the accused and 11 other members of the borough office about the work environment and found "serious violations" and evidence of psychological harassment.
Sources within Projet Montréal said the work climate changed dramatically when Harris was hired as the new chief of staff, replacing Daniel Sanger, who had been moved to another position in the office. A few weeks later, Sanger, a former chief of staff to ex-Plateau-Mont-Royal mayor Luc Ferrandez and a longtime Projet Montréal strategist, was fired by Harris and given just minutes to leave with his belongings. Sources also noted that Montgomery and borough director Stéphane Plante had had confrontations.
The departure of Montgomery from Projet Montréal stands in stark contrast to election night of Nov. 5, 2017, when she and Plante were shown dancing together in jubilation over their success.
Montgomery, a former Montreal Gazette justice reporter, has a long and well-documented history of fighting against harassment and abuse.
In August, Montgomery won a long-standing battle against Robert Edgar, who had followed and confronted her for 20 years( https://montrealgazette.com/news/three-year-probation-period-for-man-irrationally-obsessed-with-borough-mayor-sue-montgomery ), when a judge barred him from being near her or communicating with her in any way, including at city council meetings.
As a victim of sexual abuse, she was the co-creator of the hashtag #BeenRapedNeverReported in 2014 that has been shared more than 10 million times.
On Thursday night, Montgomery posted a quote on Facebook intimating she saw the storm coming, but did not intend to bow quietly.
" 'The ultimate measure of a person is not where he or she stands in moments of comfort and convenience, but where he or she stands at times of challenge and controversy.' (slightly altered) Martin Luther King Jr.
"I stand for what is right."
Montgomery is not the first borough mayor to be kicked out of Projet Montréal in connection with harassment complaints. Villeray-St-Michel-Parc-Extension Mayor Giuliana Fumagalli was ordered to only have communications with the borough director( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/borough-mayor-kept-at-arms-length-from-staff-as-harassment-probe-ends ) after an investigation ordered by Plante by the comptroller general into accusations of harassment against her by her employees.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )

