With polls showing the Parti Québécois in third place ahead of the Oct. 1 provincial election, observers are concerned some PQ activists may be bending too far to the right on immigration issues - and flirting with extremist groups online - to try to bring in more voters.
An investigation into two closed Facebook groups, whose stated goals are to bolster the base of the party, shows a growing coziness between far-right groups like La Meute and Storm Alliance on the one hand, and members and supporters of the Parti Québécois on the other - from grassroots activists to aspiring candidates to officials on the executive council.
The investigation focused on the Facebook groups PQ!!!... Rien d'autre!!! and Patriotes du Parti Québécois, with 1,544 and 2,023 members respectively.
It found that many participants, while supporters of the PQ, were also members of La Meute and/or Storm Alliance.
"We went fishing with the names of aspiring (PQ) candidates, and then saw what groups they were in, and what was being said," said Jeff Ray, an anti-racist activist who published his findings on the blog Onjase.org( https://onjase.org/post/2018/05/26/177-le-PQ-et-l-islamophobie-ignorance-connivence ).
"There are at least a dozen of these kinds of groups, but these two groups stand out. Key personalities of the far right are participating in these groups and there's a strong focus on Islam, Muslims, 'illegals' and closing borders - all the themes of the far right."
Ray vows to expand his research to include the Coalition Avenir Québec, currently in first place in the polls. The CAQ says if elected, it will impose a values test on new immigrants.
The Liberals, on the other hand, are so universally despised by the extreme right that they may be immune, he said.
In the meantime, however, Ray says the links between this fringe of PQ supporters and the far-right are worrisome.
The administrators of the Rien d'autre group, for example, include two women who are members of both La Meute and Storm Alliance.
A third administrator, Gérard Gerry Sévigny, is a member of Storm Alliance.
In July 2017, Sévigny was given a special welcome to Storm Alliance by then-leader Dave Treg.
Months later, just before Storm Alliance's September protest at the Lacolle border crossing against so-called "illegal" immigration, he posted a message saying, "I am separatist and tomorrow I'LL BE WITH YOU... TOGETHER we will overcome."
In the Venn diagram, the intersection between historically progressive nationalists and the far right seems to be expanding.
Among the participants in both Facebook groups are also key figures in the extreme right, like Matt Galarno, the head of Storm Alliance in Montreal; Sylvain Lacroix, the head of the Mouvement Républicain Québécois; and André Pitre, a.k.a. Stu Pitt, a self-described "socio-political commentator" sponsored by La Meute.
"Quick quick quick, Nation. There's only the PQ for October," wrote Denise Girard, an administrator on Rien d'autre, in April, reposting a conspiracy story about the Muslim lobby in Quebec. "And we're called crazy when we say that soon there will be sharia law here."
"I hope with all my heart that no Muslim will be elected in our country, Quebec. We have no need for representatives of that satanic religion," responded another member.
Three days later, another administrator, Diane Rose, suggested people refuse to be served by Sikhs, Muslims or people wearing veils. "Leave the restaurant in that case. At some point they won't have many clients left."
None of the administrators responded to requests for an interview.
The investigation revealed hundreds of posts like these, with stories published on xenophobic sites like Le Peuple, and fake news from around the globe. Reports on how Europe is on the verge of decriminalizing rape, for example, to suit new immigrants; and refugee children in Halifax attacking others at school.
As recently as April, members were posting about that imaginary second Muslim shooter at the mosque in Quebec City.
Ray, who uses a pseudonym to protect himself from on- and off-line harassment, says there is a difference between the content on these sites and what is found in far-right groups, however.
La Meute members are all of one mind, he said, while here there is a diversity of opinion.
There are also attempts made by some members to counter fake news and conspiracy theories on the site.
In early May, for example, someone posted a story about a man being stabbed in Granby, with the following comment: "Apparently a majority of criminals are passing through our borders with the doors wide open."
Another member asked what Roxham Rd. had to do with the story - the stabbing involved several local men with previous criminal records.
Here, far-right themes are mixed in with more garden-variety PQ issues, and talk of how to mobilize PQ supporters. It's impossible to determine how many members of these Facebook groups are officially members of the PQ. Lists of members are confidential. Asked in March for a "show of hands" of how many members of Rien d'autre were PQ members, about 130 people responded.
But the discussion often returns to how immigration is another way that Canada is imposing itself on Quebec - and how migrants are invading the country.
"These are not organized far-right groups with all their hierarchy," Ray said. "But I've seen a lot of shared content that would be very much at home with Storm Alliance or La Meute. ... It's copy and paste."
It's all the more troubling, Ray says, given the presence of representatives of the PQ, some of them in high places.
(Story continues below image)
***
PQ Leader Jean-François Lisée declined to be interviewed for this story. His press attaché, Bruno-Pierre Cyr, said:
"We have no comment to make on groups that have no official link with our political organization. These groups are formed at the initiative of citizens or members and what is said (on these platforms) is their business and do not represent official positions."
And yet one aspiring PQ candidate, Muguette Paillé, was summarily dropped( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/muguette-paille-withdraws-from-pq-after-comments-on-far-right-sites ) from the PQ ticket last month when her anti-Muslim comments on similar sites were revealed.
Just days after Lisée called her the "voice of popular wisdom," the PQ announced she would not be running as a candidate.
On PQ!!!... Rien d'autre!!!, where Paillé was also a member, others in the group were incensed.
"We're no longer free to think what we want. Gang of hypocrites," said one.
"To say Madame Paillé is Islamophobic IS INSULTING ALL OF US who are defending our rights," said another.
Lisée is not a member of either of these groups. But he has made public statements that appeal to the far-right, suggesting in 2016, for example, that women in burkas could potentially be hiding AK-47s( https://www.ledevoir.com/politique/quebec/480241/course-au-pq-les-grandes-entrevues-du-devoir-rouvrir-la-boite-de-pandore ), and more recently that Canada should build a fence at Roxham Rd. - and have Mexicans pay for it( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/lisees-border-fence-plan-draws-ridicule-from-opposition-parties ).
(He later downgraded the fence to a cedar hedge.)
At the PQ convention May 26, Lisée also announced( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/pq-platform-proposes-moving-toward-free-university-education ) the party, if elected, would table a law to prevent public sector workers from wearing religious signs, including police, judges, teachers and daycare educators.
But other politicians besides Paillé are - or were until very recently - on Rien d'autre or Patriotes.
The list of Facebook group members who have interacted on the site include Marie-Louise Séguin, a former candidate for the PQ and now the president of the PQ executive in the Soulanges riding; Mario Beaulieu, the former leader of the Bloc Québécois; Thierry Bilodeau, a vice-president of the PQ's youth wing; and Luc Lemoine, a member of the PQ executive in Montreal.
Attempts to contact them through Facebook, email and by phone were unsuccessful. Beaulieu and Bilodeau appear to have unsubscribed from the Patriotes group since screen grabs of their participation in the Facebook groups were published on Onjase.org.
Ray makes the distinction between these participating members and those who may not even be aware that they are members of the group.
Some high-ranking members of the PQ are listed as members of the Rien d'autre group, for example, but there is no evidence of them interacting on the site.
One of them was Jean Bottari, who hopes to be the PQ candidate for the riding of Bertrand.
He told the Montreal Gazette that he recently joined the group because he thought that as a candidate it was a good idea to be part of groups disseminating information about the PQ.
But when alerted to the kind of content regularly found on the site, he did his own research and unsubscribed himself.
"It's incredible! These are not the positions of the PQ!" he said. "Maybe there are a lot of people who are duped, like I was. You're asked to join a group and you accept without verifying the content."
Manon Bévillard, the president of the PQ executive in Argenteuil, had a similar reaction - she said she didn't understand why her name was mentioned on the Onjase blog because "she always denounces the excesses of certain PQ members and activists." She has also unsubscribed in the past week.
Even those PQ members who are participating, by liking certain posts or commenting, are not necessarily Islamophobic or anti-immigrant, Ray insisted.
"But they are participating in a dialogue where Islamophobic sentiments are legitimized and they let it happen," Ray said. "It's up to them to explain why. Perhaps they tolerate it to get at those voters."
Aurélie Campana, the head of research on terrorism and extremism at Université Laval in Quebec City, who has just finished five years of research into extreme-right groups in Canada, said she has seen an evolution in the way they are interfering in Quebec and Canadian politics.
"These far-right groups and militants no longer hesitate to speak up and get into the public debate, either in protests in Quebec City or on open or closed Facebook pages," she said, declining to comment specifically on the two groups mentioned here. "But we can't say whether this is a strategy of the group or of individuals who decide to participate."
It can be a way to place far-right content into the mainstream discourse, as La Meute and Storm Alliance both try to appear socially acceptable to the so-called oppressed, white majority, she said.
"It's worrisome, because it shows that the ideas we associate with the far right are taken up by people who either don't necessarily understand or are looking for votes. But it can be dangerous."
In Europe, mainstream parties began to veer right to undercut the far right. But that strategy didn't work, Campana says. Far-right parties are now in government in several countries.
And in Canada, her studies have shown that the aim of far-right groups is not to infiltrate the mainstream parties, but to discredit them.
"Over and above everything else, they are anti-establishment, anti-pluralist and anti-democratic," she says. "The lesson for all political parties is be careful who you recruit."
csolyom@postmedia.com( mailto:csolyom@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/csolyom( https://twitter.com/ )
CREDIT: Catherine Solyom, Montreal Gazette



