When Milos Raonic was down two sets to none against David Goffin in the fourth round at Wimbledon, John McEnroe had a little chat with him in the locker room during a rain delay.
 
Make that a loud chat.
"Show me you have balls!" McEnroe screamed.
McEnroe was coaching Raonic at the time and with his intensity -- and possibly his manhood -- questioned, Raonic came fighting back to win in five sets en route to becoming the first Canadian male to reach a singles Grand Slam final before losing to Andy Murray. The win over Goffin marked the first time Raonic had ever come back to win a match after losing the first two sets.
He showed big ... you know what.
Raonic shared the McEnroe locker-room story in a recent article for The Players Tribune website.
Coming into the U.S. Open, Raonic and Canadian tennis fans were hoping he could take that next big step and actually win a Grand Slam championship, but it won't happen.
Not even close.
Raonic was eliminated in the second round Wednesday afternoon, dropping a 6-7 (4), 7-5, 7-5, 6-1 decision to American Ryan Harrison in 30C heat.
Raonic is ranked No. 6 in the world and was seeded fifth here, while Harrison is ranked No. 120. But it wasn't the most sensitive part of Raonic's male anatomy to blame for this upset. And it wasn't the fact McEnroe decided before the U.S. Open that he no longer wanted to coach Raonic, preferring to focus on his TV duties with ESPN.
Raonic's problems were in his head and other parts of his body. The result was cramps that started midway through the second set and continued to get worse.
"A little bit of stress," Raonic said in the media interview room afterward. "I don't think hydration was an issue. I think I always take that precaution. Probably just nerves and stress, a mental sort of overexuberance rather than -- probably more than it should."
Harrison, who had a 1-1 record in two previous meetings with Raonic, put up a tough fight right from the start while wearing the same fluorescent Nike green colours Montreal's Eugenie Bouchard wore the day before in her first-round loss. Harrison had the matching shirt, socks and wristbands (batteries not included), but played much better than he looked.
The American pushed Raonic to a first-set tiebreaker, but everything looked fine for the Canadian after he won that fairly easily, 7-4. Harrison took a 5-2 lead in the second set before Raonic fought back to make it 5-5 and then lost the next two games and the set. That's when the problems really started. Raonic took a medical timeout to have his arm massaged and later had a trainer rub down his left leg. But the cramps were everywhere.
"The left arm; right forearm there towards the end of the third; both quads; a little bit hip flexor on the left," said Raonic, who couldn't remember ever losing a match before because of cramps.
"The really painful cramps started to pass at some point in the third set, but then I started getting small ones where I couldn't hold the racquet," added Raonic, who made 69 unforced errors. "I couldn't switch grips from one point to the next. There were a few points where I would hold the racquet with my left and trying to stretch out my right hand in between shots, and that's not going to work."
Raonic was asked if he could turn back the clock would he have done anything different before the match.
"I don't know actually, to be honest with you," he said. "Maybe try to be a bit more active at the beginning of the match. But every single thing I do, I do with a very careful sort of, as much of possible, calculation. I count how many glasses of water I drink. I pay specific attention to what I eat, what I consume, what's going to be the best for me. How much before I consume it. All these kind of things. I try to be on top of it as much as I can."
What if McEnroe had been there to yell at him again ... could that have made a difference?
"Well, I don't believe so," Raonic said. "I was my own worst enemy today. I tried the best I could to find my way out of it. My body didn't let me."
THE HEAT IS ON
If you've been watching the U.S. Open on TV, you've probably seen spectators cooling themselves off in the stands with yellow fans shaped like tennis balls.
With the temperature reaching 30C again Wednesday, you couldn't walk -- or sit -- anywhere at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center without seeing someone using one of the fans. They're even popular at evening sessions in the giant and sticky Arthur Ashe Stadium, which seats 23,771.
The yellow cardboard fans could go down as one of the most brilliant marketing ideas in sports. They are being handed out by people promoting a Visit Orlando campaign in Florida. But maybe someone should be handing out Visit New York fans in Orlando, where they were preparing for Tropical Storm Hermine on Wednesday.
During Canadian Vasek Pospisil's match Wednesday on the Grandstand Court, which is like an oven, an elderly woman was taken away in a wheelchair after fainting from the heat. She appeared to be OK when she left, but definitely could have used one of those yellow fans.
scowan@postmedia.com
twitter.com/StuCowan1
CREDIT: Stu Cowan Montreal Gazette