A 19-year-old student suspected of killing his parents at a Central Michigan University dormitory before running from campus was apprehended early Saturday following an intensive daylong search that included more than 100 police officers, some heavily armed in camouflage uniforms, authorities said.
James Eric Davis Jr. was arrested without incident after an individual spotted him on a train passing through the north end of campus shortly after midnight, according to a release posted on Central Michigan's Emergency Communication website.
The university identified the two dead as Davis' mother Diva Davis and father James Davis Sr., a part-time police officer in the Chicago suburb of Bellwood. The shooting occurred around 8:30 a.m. at a residence hall at Central Michigan, which is about 70 miles (112.6 kilometres) north of Lansing.
A fierce nor'easter that flooded streets, snapped trees in pieces and knocked out power to more than 1.8 million homes and businesses continued to lash the Atlantic coast, but the winds were expected to slowly let up as the storm moved offshore. Forecasters said rain and snow was expected to slowly come to an end early Saturday, hanging on across southern New England the longest.
The five killed during Friday's storm included two children. A man and a 6-year-old boy were killed in different parts of Virginia, while an 11-year-old boy in New York state and a man in Newport, Rhode Island, both were killed. A 77-year-old woman died after being struck by a branch outside her home near Baltimore.
A Malaysian official says the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 by a U.S. company will likely end in June, as families of passengers marked the fourth anniversary of the plane's disappearance with renewed hope that the world's biggest aviation mystery will be solved.
Malaysia in January inked a "no cure, no fee" deal with Houston, Texas-based Ocean Infinity to resume the hunt for the plane, a year after the official search by Malaysia, Australia and China in the southern Indian Ocean was called off.
The plane vanished March 8, 2014, while flying from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing with 239 people on board.
Malaysia's civil aviation chief, Azharuddin Abdul Rahman, said Saturday that the search is going smoothly and is expected to end by mid-June.
Maybe it was destiny for a movie with a pile of poop as a central character. The Emoji Movie has received Hollywood's most famous frown, the Razzie Award , for worst picture of 2017, making it the first animated feature in 38 years to earn the top dishonour. In a statement, the Razzies said the film came in a year when "Hollywood's recycled trash heap attained an all-time high" and saw a "toxic-level lack of originality."
The annual awards bestowed on the worst the movie business has to offer were announced Saturday in their traditional spot, the day before the Academy Awards. The Emoji Movie landed four of the 10 Razzies given out this year, also taking worst screenplay, worst director and worst screen combo, which was given to "any two obnoxious emojis" from the movie.
CREDIT: Colin Harris, Montreal Gazette

