It seems winter is testing us.
After a respite on Thursday from bone-chilling temperatures, Montrealers were waking up to a very rainy but warm Friday. At 7 a.m., the high of 7 degrees Celsius had already broken 1986's record 5.3 C for Jan. 12. However, the national forecaster warned conditions will get worse over the next few days.
If you planned on doing outdoor activities this weekend, it might be more advisable to stock up on hot chocolate and have quiet time at home.
Environment Canada issued a winter storm warning early Friday, saying "hazardous winter conditions" are expected as the temperatures dip and the rain transitions to frozen precipitation.
The rain will change to freezing rain and ice pellets, making a slippery base for 15 to 25 centimetres of snow expected to fall overnight Friday into Saturday.
"Snow will intensify Saturday and will be accompanied by brisk northwest winds giving local blowing snow," the statement said, adding that highways, roads, walkways and parking lots may become icy and difficult to navigate due to the ice and snow expected.
Friday's high of 9 Celsius will be reached at 1 p.m., but temperatures will take a steep downturn starting around 4 p.m. It's expected to be minus-10 by Saturday at 7 a.m., and the temperatures will continue to plummet throughout the day on Saturday, with temperatures reaching the minus-20s throughout the day. The high forecast for Sunday is minus-21, and Monday's high is forecast at minus-20. It will warm up slightly for Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, with temperatures around minus-10. A high of minus-3 is forecast for next Friday, Jan. 19.
Meanwhile, Montreal streets were 86 per cent cleared of last week's snowstorm as of 2 p.m. The Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough still lagged, with a 67-per-cent completion rate. Thursday's champion( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-is-at-the-bottom-of-the-snow-clearing-heap-st-leonard-on-top ) Saint-Léonard had completely cleared its streets and several other boroughs were either finished or nearly finished by 2 p.m. Friday was an off day for workers, so there were fewer plows and snow-removal trucks on the streets.
Related
N.D.G. is at the bottom of the snow-clearing heap, St-Léonard on top( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-is-at-the-bottom-of-the-snow-clearing-heap-st-leonard-on-top )
November 2017: Prepare for the Montreal winter of your youth - that's La Nina( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/prepare-for-the-montreal-winter-of-your-youth-thats-la-nina )
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

