It seems so utterly elementary. Concerned citizen Émile Fattal feels he has the perfect solution to help fellow Montrealers avoid taking unintended triple Salchows - before crumbling down on city sidewalks.
"It all comes down to de-icing our sidewalks by applying the same standards as those relating to de-icing our streets: salt them while you are clearing the snow," Fattal says. "When you walk on a sidewalk, it should be as clear as the street."
Makes sense.
Fattal, entrepreneur and lawyer, notes that after every snowfall, the black asphalt on our roads becomes quickly visible while the sidewalks, even if worked on, remain covered.
"The sidewalks may have been cleared of snow, but a film remains. This layer then evolves into slush and eventually icy, uneven surfaces. And that transforms into the treacherous terrain we seem to have to deal with all the time.
"Everyone assumes this is something which is insoluble and part of living in a northern climate. But this is a false story. There is a wilful blindness here."
It's not like Fattal hasn't proposed this plan to municipal politicians and functionaries, either. He has sent letters and had meetings, but to little avail.
"They tell me they are putting abrasives and salt on sidewalks," he says. "But I tell them: 'Whatever you're doing with the sidewalks, if you think it's so fantastic, then why don't you reverse the role. Do what you do to the sidewalks to the streets, and vice versa.' "
Fattal claims a former city borough mayor told him that such a scenario would result in too many accidents.
"That is precisely my point," Fattal says.
Short of installing heated sidewalks - which is now out of the question because of cost constraints - it couldn't possibly hurt to try this approach.
Fattal notes that some politicians have been seemingly amenable to the idea, but have still failed to act.
"Many of them think that abrasives are a good substitute for salting. It is no substitute," Fattal insists. "Why can't our sidewalks be as ice-free as our bike paths?"
As is the case with Urgences Santé and local hospital emergency rooms, Fattal also provides alarming statistics about the number of serious outdoor falls reported to authorities.
"But that's only the tip of the iceberg. How many additional injuries go unreported?"
Fattal believes the issue may all boil down to economics.
"When salt was introduced on our roads, it was considered a luxury, and so this perceived extravagance was not going to be wasted on pedestrians," he asserts. "Regardless, I'm not aware of anybody having done a cost analysis."
So Fattal provides his own analysis. He figures that most streets are about 65 feet wide and that sidewalks are about four feet wide on each side.
"So, salting eight feet of sidewalks against 65 feet of streets works out to about 12 per cent, which is not a huge additional cost compared to the overall health costs.
"The thinking seems to be that as long as traffic moves on our streets, pedestrians have to fend for themselves. Some will injure themselves, and those who are more able will not. That seems to have been the standard for the last 50 years, and few have questioned it."
Having endured more than his fair share of tumbles over the years, Fattal acknowledges that his obsession with icy sidewalks began with concerns for his own well-being.
"I started asking myself why I was always walking on the street and not the sidewalks during winter," says Fattal, 72. "It occurred to me that I was taking less of a chance getting hit by a car by walking on the street than avoiding the certainty of slipping and falling on the sidewalks.
"I know if I do fall now and break a hip, it will be a life-changing experience. I'm still very active, and I would like it to remain that way. That's why I can't believe that something so simple isn't being done."
When presented with Fattal's solution, Jean-François Parenteau, Montreal's point man for snow-clearing operations, said city crews were using the same salt and stones on the sidewalks as on the streets.
"But the difference is that when we use the salt trucks on the roads, we can put more pressure on the ground than we can with the (sidewalk equipment)," Parenteau said. "If we put too much pressure, there's a danger of them hitting the cars parked on the side of the streets."
Parenteau conceded that more work has to be done on the sidewalks to clear them of ice. He pointed out that in future snow-clearing operations with no cars on the streets, sidewalk crews would put more pressure on their machines to help rectify the problem.
"People will then start noticing the difference on the sidewalks," said Parenteau, who is in his first year as the city snow's czar and is not oblivious to the discontent of citizens. "I like a challenge, and this is a huge one."
For his part, Fattal is not impressed with Parenteau's reasoning.
"Nonsense," Fattal said. "That's an irrational argument to me. It has nothing to do with pressure of the machines on sidewalks. It has everything to do with salt."
Here's hoping for some rationality - and soon. The city is slated to be hit with another storm on Wednesday. This could make for dicey times since snow-clearing operations from this past weekend's 14-centimetre dump only started at 7 p.m. on Monday.
bbrownstein@postmedia.com( mailto:bbrownstein@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/billbrownstein( http://Twitter.com/billbrownstein )
Related
Bill Brownstein: Our bones are no match for icy sidewalks( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/bill-brownstein-our-bones-are-no-match-for-icy-sidewalks )
CREDIT: Bill Brownstein, Montreal Gazette

