Johnny Manziel might be preparing for his first Canadian Football League start, but this is hardly his first rodeo.
Manziel became the first freshman in NCAA history to win the Heisman Trophy while playing for Texas A&M. And he was a first-round draft choice of the Cleveland Browns who started eight games - two wins - over two seasons.
Nervous? No. Excited? Indeed.
"This is just going to be a game. Go out and execute our plan and see where it goes," he said following Wednesday's practice at Olympic Stadium. "This is the start of my time up here in the CFL. I'm looking forward to whatever this journey holds.
"I'm very excited, not nervous at all," added the 25-year-old. "This isn't my first start ever. It's not my first time getting behind centre and having to direct the whole offence and trying to score. It is up here, but I feel like I have a firm enough grasp to be able to be in the game and do what I need to do, or (head coach Mike) Sherman wouldn't have let that happen."
Manziel, one of five players involved in one of the league's biggest trades in history, July 22, will start Friday night at Molson Stadium against the Tiger-Cats. Hamilton signed him in May, but before the trade, Manziel sat on the bench for five games, unable to dislodge incumbent quarterback Jeremiah Masoli.
Manziel, to the chagrin of many who came to the McGill University venue last week, didn't play in Thursday's loss against Edmonton, but has practised with the starting offence since Monday. On Tuesday, Sherman stated the obvious, proclaiming Manziel would start.
Sherman said it wasn't until Tuesday's practice that he finalized his decision.
"I needed to see how quickly he could adapt to the playbook," Sherman explained. "Over the weekend, I needed to see him coming in and working. He connected with the receivers on different occasions around town to make sure they were on the same page. His work ethic was demonstrated over the weekend.
"When he came on the field (Monday), going through his progressions, he was pretty on."
Cleveland eventually soured on Manziel. While his on-field play had some inconsistencies, it was more his off-field transgressions that eventually led to his demise. The Browns, like the Als, have spent years struggling on the field while having a carousel of starting quarterbacks.
"I'll never forget the 30-0 beating I got in my first start in the NFL," Manziel remembered. "I'll never forget going into Pittsburgh, dropping back on the first play of the game and the ball slipping out of my hand and bouncing off the top of my helmet, fumbling to the other team.
"I've been in situations. I've had the chance to get a lot of the jitters out of the way."
This is only the Als' seventh game this season, but Manziel incredibly will become the fifth quarterback utilized, after Drew Willy, Jeff Mathews, Matt Shiltz and Vernon Adams, who played the entire game against the Eskimos. Both Willy and Mathews are injured.
While Adams performed admirably last week, passing for 217 yards and rushing for 72, it wasn't enough to generate a victory. Despite the Als' 23 points, equalling their most-productive output this season, they scored only two touchdowns. Virtually everything around the quarterback on this team remains unchanged. Expectations of Manziel should be tempered, at least until he gains more experience. That's only logical.
Sherman, at least, has done him a favour, starting him at home, where the spectators will be in Manziel's corner. And against a defensive scheme and personnel with which he should be familiar. The Als have a 1-5 record, but the Ticats aren't much better, at 2-4. Both teams are on three-game losing streaks.
"There are some things I'm familiar with that we have in this offence that mesh with what I've done in the past," Manziel said. "We've had a solid week. We're coming together and trying to build some chemistry. We have some things that are beneficial to my skill set.
"Look, not everything's going to go the way we want it to. We're going to have some struggles and they're going to make some plays. That's the name of the game. You're going to do some good, some bad, some you wish you'd have thrown and some you wish you wouldn't have."
If the Als win, and given the weak East Division, they would be tied with the Ticats for second place and, for the moment, be in a playoff position with 11 games remaining. Incredibly, Montreal hasn't won at home since last Aug. 11, against Toronto, which was without quarterback Ricky Ray. The Als then ended the season with 11 successive defeats.
"We just need a win at home. That's step one," Sherman said. "I always feel games are must-wins, but we're one-third through the season. We just need to win a game at home, in front of our fans.
"I'm sure there's going to be times (Manziel) struggles. It's his first start in quite some time. He's going to have struggles. Him being able to work through some of those struggles is important."
Meanwhile, boundary cornerback Tommie Campbell (hamstring) didn't practice Wednesday. But Sherman still expects him to play.
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1
Related
Zurkowsky: Johnny Manziel storm is about to hit Montreal full force( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/the-johnny-manziel-storm-is-about-to-hit-montreal-full-force?video_autoplay=true )
Alouettes expected to start QB Johnny Manziel this week( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/alouettes-expected-to-start-qb-johnny-manziel-this-week?video_autoplay=true )
Eskimos receiver Derel Walker expects Johnny Manziel to excel in CFL( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/eskimos-receiver-derel-walker-expects-johnny-manziel-to-excel-in-cfl?video_autoplay=true )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

