The city of Montreal is braced for a new influx of asylum seekers in the coming months, but will not be housing them in the Olympic Stadium, the executive-committee member responsible for housing and diversity said Wednesday.
"We're expecting a flood when the nice weather arrives," Magda Popeanu said to reporters at city hall after a meeting of the city's executive committee.
"We're prepared. We've been working with the office that was set up last year to deal with the migrants who came across the border," she said.
"We have an action plan for housing them and taking care of them and we've also been working hard with the Quebec Department of Immigration and Diversity," Popeanu said.
The city will use a variety of buildings, such as schools, to house the newcomers, she said. But unlike last year, when beds were set up in the Olympic Stadium, it will not requisition the Big O, she said.
"I hope never to open it," Popeanu said.
About 15,381 asylum-seekers, mostly from Haiti, were intercepted by the RCMP trying to enter Quebec from the United States between November 2016 and November 2017, Canada Border Services said last November( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heated-trailers-in-place-near-lacolle-border-as-haitians-in-u-s-ponder-future ). The flood of migrants into Montreal last summer forced city officials to set up temporary accommodation in the Olympic Stadium and the former Royal Victoria Hospital.
Last year, the U.S. government cancelled a temporary residence program for almost 60,000 Haitians in the U.S.
The Temporary Protected Status (TPS) was granted to Haitians who fled to the U.S. following the earthquake in 2010. It allows Haitians to live and work in the U.S. until conditions in Haiti have improved enough to return home.
When the program ends for Haitians in July 2019, Haitians in the U.S. will have to leave, live underground or apply to stay in the U.S. using another immigration program.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Marian Scott, Montreal Gazette

