Friday, July 17, 2020: Here are some of the stories we've been following today.
FAQ: What you need to know about mask law
It will be mandatory to wear masks in indoor public venues in Quebec, starting Saturday. The new law will require citizens (age 12 and over) to wear a mask or face covering that covers the nose and mouth in enclosed or partially enclosed public places. We have some answers from government sources to frequently asked questions about the new mask law.
Mask law will hurt bars, restaurants: poll
More than one Quebecer in four plans to avoid going out for a drink or a meal after a new law that makes masks compulsory takes effect Saturday, a new poll has found.
Close bars to open schools?
A new rise in coronavirus cases has fuelled worries that, if the current trend continues in Quebec, the province will face community transmission levels that are too high to safely open schools in the fall.
A lack of transparency?
In another troubling sign of a lack of transparency during the pandemic, Montreal's public health department has declined to provide the latest data on COVID-19 cases linked to bars after releasing statistics for most of the week.
Also: Coronavirus updates for Friday, July 17
Video: Dr. Joe Schwarcz on hair dye: history, chemistry and possible dangers
The heat is on - again
Yet another heat wave is expected to wash over Montreal this weekend. In a special weather warning issued Friday afternoon, Environment Canada said highs will be near 30 degrees Celsius during the day with humidex values ranging from 35 to 39 on Saturday and possibly exceeding 40 on Sunday.
Fired museum head speaks out
"You bug me." That's what Nathalie Bondil says Michel de la Chenelière, chairman of the board of the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, told her when she asked why she was being fired as director general of the museum.
Free transit, other options suggested
The Mercier Bridge will be reduced to one lane only in both directions this weekend and will remain that way until Aug. 17. Transport Quebec is enacting certain measures to try to limit the impact the closure will have on motorists during the next month, including free public transit next week.
Quebec vedettes facing allegations
Sexual harassment remains a problem in the local entertainment milieu. Over the past two weeks, there has been a wave of allegations of sexual abuse and harassment levelled at well-known Quebec entertainment figures.
Canadiens defencemen Noah Juulsen (centre) and Josh Brook listen to assistant coach Luke Richardson during practice at the Bell Sports Complex in Brossard on Wednesday.
Kotkaniemi has learned to stay tight-lipped
We won't know whether Jesperi Kotkaniemi's career is back on track until the NHL postseason begins on Aug. 1 in Toronto with the Canadiens playing the Pittsburgh Penguins, but the 20-year-old Finn displayed a mastery of one veteran skill when he talked to the media Friday on a video conference call.
Also: Stu on Sports: Noah Juulsen is a feel-good story at Canadiens camp
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette

