For many, summer has not officially started in Quebec until the province's famously juicy strawberries make their way to grocery stores, kiosks and public markets. But this year, producers and consumers had to wait a little longer for their precious berries to arrive.
"Nature sure is taking her sweet time," said Phil Quinn, owner of Île-Perrot's Quinn Farm.
Strawberry season is arriving two weeks late at Quinn Farm, as is the case for the majority of harvesters throughout the province. According to Quinn, many of his crops are experiencing the reverberations of a cool, wet spring.
In addition to his strawberries, Quinn expects that his apples, sweet corn and vegetables will also be late. However, he is confident that his first strawberries will be hitting the counters next week and that self-service or u-pick cultivation( https://montrealgazette.com/life/food/table-talk-you-can-take-your-pick-of-quebec-strawberries ) will begin on Canada Day weekend. For consumers like Lea Del Bosco, this news comes after much anticipation.
"I'm glad to hear they're finally here," said Del Bosco, who purchases the strawberries from the kiosk at the corner of her street and uses them to make strawberry jam and smoothies. "The Quebec strawberries are so much tastier and fresher than the ones coming in from other countries."
Last summer, Quinn Farm suffered from one of its worst strawberry seasons on record( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hot-summer-gave-quebec-farmers-one-of-the-worst-seasons-on-record ) as a result of hot, dry weather. He said the prolonged heat wave affected the harvest and the turnout for u-pick operations. Overall, Quinn estimated he lost $100,000 in by mid-July.
But according to Quinn, the weather has not been the sole factor behind this year's delay. He said he believes the recent increase in minimum wage( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebecs-minimum-hourly-wage-to-increase-to-12-50-on-may-1 ) to $12.50 an hour has hampered production. With more than 50 per cent of production costs allocated to labour, he said picking strawberries has become too expensive for some harvesters. In an effort to support harvesters and their crops, the Association des producteurs de fraises et framboises du Québec requested financial assistance( https://www.freshplaza.com/article/9105769/canada-strawberry-and-raspberry-producers-hampered-by-rising-minimum-wage/ ) from the government, much to Quinn's discontent.
"I am a firm believer that the market should be able to take care of itself without government assistance," said Quinn. "We should be in a situation where we can take care of ourselves."
For Quinn, this change means charging a little more for the fruits of his labour. For other strawberry producers, it means worrying that consumers will opt for cheaper alternatives over pricier Quebec strawberries. And for consumers like Del Bosco, it means making a choice between affordability and shopping locally.
"I want to support our local farmers," said Del Bosco. "Yes, the strawberries from California are cheaper. But, when you buy the Quebec strawberries, at least you know that you're getting a product that hasn't been in a fridge for days at a time."
Related
Fresh in Montreal: Strawberries have arrived, earlier than usual( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/fresh-in-montreal-strawberries-have-arrived-earlier-than-usual )
Table Talk: You can take your pick of Quebec strawberries( https://montrealgazette.com/life/food/table-talk-you-can-take-your-pick-of-quebec-strawberries )
Hot summer gave Quebec farmers 'one of the worst seasons on record'( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hot-summer-gave-quebec-farmers-one-of-the-worst-seasons-on-record )

