British ColumbiaGordon Campbell and his Liberals shook down the NDP from the legislature and left them only a slim two pickings, vowing to take the province into Harris and Klein country. But the province, which is already in the economic doldrums, ...
British Columbia Gordon Campbell and his Liberals shook down the NDP from the legislature and left them only a slim two pickings, vowing to take the province into Harris and Klein country. But the province, which is already in the economic doldrums, faced immediate pressure as it saw a $5-billion deficit looming in the horizon. Its nurses threatened mass resignations, so it passed an anti-strike bill, and for good measure brought down a vicious civil servant work force cut of one-third. A too, too long transit strike hit the region, which left commuters trying to find alternate routes and methods. Southern British Columbia was rattled on April 30, and left waiting for the Big One to strike after an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.8 hit the region, the most powerful in 50 years. And, of course, a marijuana tea house opened shop.
Alberta Two girls, one lost, the other found. One snatched away, the other wandered out into the backyard. Albertans will remember Jessica Koopmans, the five-year-old from Lethbridge, whose body was found in a field after she disappeared from her home in May. A family friend later became the prime suspect. Then there was baby Erika who, just reaching past the year mark, found her way out into the -17 cold. Several hours later, she was found, frozen solid. After several days, she was hailed the miracle baby, who was expected to walk again, and attracted world-wide attention. Ralph's world took a roller coaster ride, as Premier Ralph Klein, high on another provincial election victory, visited Washington as a strong oilman, then plunging into the terror of self admission when his drinking habit got the best of him at a homeless shelter. Mr. Klein admitted his problem, asked for forgiveness and, in the poll of public opinion, was on his way up again. Saskatchewan The fields were scalded a rusty gold, its water was tainted in one town, and it bid goodbye to a long-time Premier. The growing season across southern Canada was its driest in 34 years. The effects were felt especially in southern Alberta and Saskatchewan, with some districts weathering their second or third year of water shortages. Farmers took to the streets, many hit Ottawa, but most saw their plights ignored. Percy Schmeiser lost his case over genetically modified canola to biotechnology giant Monsanto Co. after a court ruled he infringed the company's patent. Robert Latimer entered jail this year after the nation's high court, showing little mercy, ruled that the farmer must serve at least 10 years for the murder of his severely disabled daughter Tracey. NDP Premier Roy Romanow formally stepped down from his post, Lorne Calvert took over, and his NDP-Liberal coalition was forced to face a no-confidence vote (they won). Mr. Calvert called for an inquiry, perhaps taking a lesson from Ontario's Harris, immediately after North Battleford reported an outbreak of cryptosporidium that made a wary public frightened to drink tap water.
Manitoba The province ended the year on a sad note, saluting a fallen Mountie. At the legislature, the famous Golden Boy atop the building was covered up, then they decided to take him down for repairs after workers found a structural support post corroded. Inside, 35 farmers spent a night in March in protest of inadequate support from the federal government. The province saw fit to lift restrictions on liquor laws, and let stores and outlets sell alcohol on Sunday, while federal Health Minister Allan Rock, after legalizing marijuana use for medical treatment, toured a government sanctioned growing operation in Flin Flon, housed in a mine shaft. The province was hit by its own animal scare, culling 1,200 sheep in the south as a precaution against the spread of scrapie, a nervous disorder similar to mad-cow disease but believed harmless to humans. Thomas Sophonow was recommended to get $2.6-million for "crushing" injuries and lost opportunities resulting from his wrongful conviction in the strangling death of a vivacious Winnipeg teenager 20 years ago, and Manitoba's share was $1-million.
Ontario Before Windsor became occupied with the long lineups clogging trade routes into Detroit, it was on the lookout for dead birds, a sign of a U.S. invasion of the West Nile virus. Crazy, you'd say, but then again, t'was a summer in which the Snowbirds went down near London, Mike Harris took the stand in Walkerton and a judge slapped parents in Aylmer for doing the same to their kids. Oh yeah, and then the bugs invaded Toronto. In an almost unprecedented move, the Premier and his so-called 'common sense revolution' took the stand in the Walkerton inquiry, which was probing the deaths and illnesess caused by E.coli bacteria. He later, more surprisingly, decided to announce he was leaving politics. But not before privatizing Hydro One and setting up a leadership race that could dwarf the Canadian Alliance campaign. West Nile was the talk, with dead blue jays and crows being spotted from Windsor to Ottawa, bring fears that the virus that killed some in New York City was here. It was a hot summer, with lava-like temperatures, leading to the invasion of green aphids on Toronto streets, forcing people to cover up or eat insects. Storyboy, no relation to Quebec's Mafiaboy hacker, saw his charges dropped, after drawing national attention in 2000 by spending 35 days in jail for writing about a bullied student who blows up his school. In Aylmer, Ont., family of an ultraconservative fundamentalist church made headlines over parents' right to discipline their children. And in a sign that some higher power was with them, in nearby London, Ont. our own Snowbirds were involved in a midair collision during a publicity flight sending one jet into Lake Erie but no one died. Quebec Lucien Bouchard gave up the reins, and Bernard Landry took over, only to infuriate the federalists. Quebec City got the chance to host the Summit of the Americas in April, trying to fence out those who wanted to get in. Arrests were made, baseball bats were confiscated and when the event actually took place, the war of words changed into a live, made-for-TV cat-and-mouse game. A tear gas canister would fly through the air, with the speed and arc of a football thrown by a to-be-sacked quarterback. Then it would replay, reverse angle. Fences were torn, declarations were made, marches were completed, agreements signed. In the end, no declared victor, but the post-Seattle movement seemed stymied at the borders, only to set its sights on Kananaskis, Alta., for next year's G8 summit. Quebeckers watched the saga of Maurice (Mom) Boucher, a biker chieftain facing 15 murder charges, whose latest episode a $30-million lawsuit against Mr. Landry and other public figures to re-establish his honour. He saw the police swoop in on his organization, make arrests, and ever since, he's been described as 'lonely.' The province trumpted their specially built courthouse, attached to a prison through an underground passageway. In Montreal, it was all show when 2,000 posed nude for New York artist Spencer Tunick outside the Montreal Museum of Contemporary Art. And finally, and sadly, Quebec, Canada and the world lost Mordecai Richler, who gave the world such novels as and . Nova Scotia The nurses stood up and the government backed down, and it's fair to say the nurses won. In a year in which provinces and nurses stood off, the nurses in Nova Scotia got the politicians to back off on Bill 68, which would have given cabinet the right to impose a settlement and outlaw their right to strike. The union staged wildcat walkouts and threatened mass resignations. The community in Lunenburg mourned the loss of the St. John's Anglican Church that rang its bells for nearly 250 years after it was hit by fire, believed to be sparked by arson on Halloween night. In Stewiacke, a Via train derailed and a youth was charged with mischief endangering the lives of 123 people. A $35 lock would have prevented the accident, officials said later. Cape Breton coal miners ended an era this year, as the Prince mine shut down after the industry began more than two centuries in the Sydney area. The provinces hopes that one of the industry's legacies, the infamous Sydney tar ponds, would create jobs with a cleanup project started this year, likely to cost as much as $800-million.
New Brunswick He grew up in New Brunswick, but didn't survive . The doctors walked out. Civil servants were banned from personal Internet use. And Brunt Church didn't erupt, but the forests did. Late in the year, E. coli hit the province, claiming the life of a 23-month-old boy in Saint John. And in a historic referendum, voters chose by a narrow margin to keep their video lottery terminals. The referendum was seen as a landmark decision in the controversy over the use of the machines that bring in more than $1.6-billion to eight provinces. The popular show got its first pseudo-Canadian import in Kelly Gleason, a U.S. Army intelligence officer who was born in the United States, moved to Fredericton when he was 2. He studied in elementary school and high school there. In Burnt Church, fisheries officials gave a limited communal lobster licence to the reserve. At one point in the summer, dozens of fires were burning in the tinder-dry province, including one covering 30 hectares, forcing people to leave their homes. And the doctors, after a three-day walkout, signed a contract giving them an average pay raise of 12 per cent over three years. Newfoundland and Labrador
If such races were counted, Newfoundland won a doozy. Wait, make that Newfoundland and Labrador, the new name of the province that helps it outletter former longest-titled heavyweight Prince Edward Island. Unfortunately, there's no word on whether the new name will be shortened to NAL, nowhere near the ring of PEI. Speaking of doing things big, bulk water, for a time, made national headlines when Premier Roger Grimes announced his intention to allow the export of billions of gallons of water from Gisborne Lake for export. Ottawa quickly poured cold water on the talk. Civil servants walked out en masse, timing their job action with a snowstorm, but got a hefty settlement. The community in Pouch Cove mourned the loss of three teenagers who died after playing on unstable ice in March. Newfoundland and Nova Scotia began a fight over boundary rights, specifically over 60,000-square-kilometre expanse of seabed. Finally, as December comes to a close, the curtain rises on the Hollywood version of centred on Kevin Spacey with Newfoundland - make that Newfoundland and Labrador - as its backdrop. Prince Edward Island Potato, potatoes, it's all the same to us, but for the United States it caused a lot of fuss. After prolonged battles, the United States scrapped import restrictions on most PEI spuds, bringing an end to a nine-month dispute with Canada over a small fungus outbreak that severely curbed exports of PEI's primary cash crop. It's been a bad year for the pie guy, you know, the man who pushed some tart in the Prime Minister's face at a Charlottetown fair. Evan Brown, a playwright who says he is a member of a loosely organized group called the PEI Pie Brigade, was given a 30-day sentence for the offence, then, after he arrived at the PEI correctional center, was punched by an inmate. No charges were laid.

