Don't look up.
You should keep your eyes on the sidewalk ahead of you if you venture out Thursday.
Freezing rain that ended Thursday morning was causing sidewalks to be slippery even though temperatures were hovering over the freezing mark.
And while there were no major road accidents overnight, some roads were also slippery.
The warm temperatures could also caused snow piled on the roofs of high buildings to fall.
Environment Canada ended its freezing rain warning for the Montreal region just after 6 a.m.
The weather caused several schools to cancel classes north of the city. The Commission scolaire des Laurentides cancelled classes for all elementary and high school students. The Commission scolaire des Samares also closed all its schools. The Sir Wilfrid Laurier School Board, which covers Laval, Lanaudière and the Laurentides areas, has also cancelled all classes because school-bus transportation was cancelled. Daycares remained open.
The ice should melt throughout the day, as temperatures are expected to reach 6 degrees Celsius on Thursday, and stay that warm through Friday before the temperatures plummet to -10C overnight Friday. Then, we're expecting about 10 to 15 centimetres of snow to fall over a 24-hour period between Friday and Saturday.
The bone-chilling cold will return, with a high of -10C forecast for Saturday, and highs of -18C expected for Sunday and Monday.
Snow clearing not completed
It looks like the city may not finish clearing the snow from Monday just in time for the next dump of snow. Only about 60 per cent of the streets had been cleared by Thursday morning.
A total of 30 centimetres fell between the new year and last Monday, leaving high snowbanks all over the city.
According to the city's snow clearing website( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/snowremoval/avancement ), Lachine and Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce had fallen behind in snow removal, at 38 per cent and 43 per cent, respectively. The citywide average was at 60 per cent, with Anjou and Outremont leading the pack with 80 per cent of their roads cleared. Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie was not far behind at 74 per cent.
If you're out of town and are dreading this weather, you could change your flight free of charge if you are booked with fly Air Canada. The airline is offering waiving change fees to anyone travelling to or from Montreal, Ottawa and Toronto between Thursday and Sunday. If you're flying, check the Aéroports de Montréal website( http://www.admtl.com/en ) before heading out.
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

