Ok, it looks like our Montreal Canadiens are going to win the October Stanley Cup - again.
I'm kidding around. There's no denying this squad has done better than anyone expected. Absolutely nobody predicted there was any chance that the Habs would be 6-2-2 after their first ten games. And for anyone who was still doubting if this was the real thing, Saturday's statement game against the archrival Boston Bruins settled that argument.
A 3-0 win against the Bruins on their home ice? On a Saturday night? On Hockey Night in Canada? Wow. This team just keeps impressing. Though, just because I like to grumble, let's admit that Tuukka Rask once again had his Habs psychosis in full bloom, letting in two goals on the Canadiens' first five shots. All credit to the Habs for holding off the Bruins and the best line in the NHL for the rest of the game, but Rask wasn't great on either of those goals and was downright terrible on Brendan Gallagher's marker.
Speaking of inspiring, what more can you say about Max Domi? He did it all on his goal. He came up with an incredible stretch/flip pass to linemate Artturi Lehkonen. And after Lehkonen once again flubbed a scoring chance, Domi came to the rescue, looked like he, too, was flubbing it and then ripped it over Rask's shoulder from his knees. Wow, Part II.
Montreal Canadiens' Mike Reilly collides along the boards with Boston Bruins' Noel Acciari during the second period on Oct. 27, 2018, in Boston.
Domi has been the biggest surprise of this young season. He has five goals and 11 points to lead the Habs in scoring, and keep in mind that he scored only nine goals last season with the Arizona Coyotes, including four empty-netters.
And Alex Galchenyuk has yet to score in Arizona, though he has only played three games.
It's early in the season and it is still far from clear that Montreal is a playoff team but if you're a fan, then you have to be loving this month in Habs Nation.
In an interview with the National Post( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/born-into-it-tropic-thunder-actor-jay-baruchel-divulges-stories-of-lifelong-fandom-from-new-book/wcm/e0bfd3a5-3e1f-472c-8f55-678d3d77f3ea ), Canadian actor and quintessential Habs fan Jay Baruchel says he's very impressed by this team. But like any true supporter of the most successful franchise in NHL history, Baruchel has mostly had to deal with a lot of pain and disappointment during the past quarter century of watching the Habs not win Stanley Cups.
That's part of the story he tells in his new memoir, Born Into It: A Fan's Life, which is being published on Tuesday. Reading an advance copy of the book, I was struck by how the Ottawa-born, Montreal-raised actor, writer and director captures the essence of what it means to be emotionally attached to the Habs. And I just love how he riffs on two of the themes dear to me - the soul-destroying insanity of the P.K. Subban trade and the Shakespearean tragedy that is the 21st century Montreal Canadiens.
Like thousands of Habs fans, the 2016 Subban-Shea Weber deal tested Baruchel's faith. Writes Baruchel:
"What the point? If P.K. can get traded, well then, so can Carey Price, and it's that true, then why ... devote hours and hours of my life to caring about and participating in something that doesn't really seem to care if I do or don't?"
Only to conclude: "Because this is Montreal, and Montreal will break your heart."
Exactly. That's Habs fandom in a line. We will have our hearts broken. That's the definition of this miserable life of ours since the last Cup win in 1993.
Related
In the Habs' Room: Price satisfies his sweet tooth with 41st shutout( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/in-the-habs-room-price-satisfies-his-sweet-tooth-with-41st-shutout )
About last night ... Canadiens win 3-0 in Boston( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/about-last-night-canadiens-win-3-0-in-boston )
What the Puck: Canadiens' 'character' players a drag on fourth line( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/what-the-puck-canadiens-character-players-a-drag-on-fourth-line )
Young Habs need time to master faceoffs HI/O Bonus( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/young-habs-need-time-to-master-faceoffs-hi-o-bonus )
But the chapter on the elusive 25th Cup is even more on point. I don't buy his argument that the salary cap is the problem, but Baruchel is so right when he says maybe the biggest handicap is the team's nutty obsession with its past. Writes Baruchel:
"Maybe we should pretend there was no Guy Lafleur, no Rocket Richard, no Jean Béliveau, no Patrick Roy, no Forum, no such thing as a dynasty. Maybe the only way for us to compete in the modern-era NHL is to act like we just got here."
Brilliant. The defining aspect of the past 25 years is the pregame video montage of long gone moments of Habs glory. No one does the video homage better than the Habs, but who cares? How about coming up with a contender?
Can the Habs be dragged kicking and screaming into the present? Well, like I said above, it's early but give credit to the Habs' bosses for actually adapting to the 2018 NHL with their approach this season because it's paying off big-time. So maybe there is some hope.
bkelly@postmedia.com( mailto:bkelly@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz( http://www.twitter.com/brendanshowbiz )

