Horror stories about starving seniors in overflowing diapers suffering from neglect as understaffed nursing homes struggled to cope with a global pandemic have profoundly shocked the Quebec public and shaken faith in our health system.
Marie Rinfret, Quebec's ombudsman, is as disturbed by these grim revelations as everyone else - although perhaps less surprised.
For years she has been reporting on personnel shortages in old-age homes depriving residents of basic services like feeding, dressing or bathing. The arrival of COVID-19 exacerbated every one of these weaknesses - and created worse problems, too.
"The situation for us is dramatic," Rinfret said in an interview Tuesday. "There are deficiencies that have been seen many times in certain residences, but with this pandemic things have become really alarming."
Since COVID-19 hit Quebec in March, Rinfret's office has been inundated with complaints about deplorable conditions in CHSLDs.
"We have the power to act right away," she said. "So we go to the residences where the patients mentioned in the complaint live, and we saw in many, many situations that the people were suffering prejudice and we asked that the situation be corrected so that the individual's right to security, to be treated with dignity, to receive basic care and hygiene could be upheld."
When reports emerged in the media - like dehydrated residents found on the ground at Dorval's Résidence Herron after it was put under trusteeship, or homes like Vigi Mont-Royal, where 100 per cent of patients were infected with COVID-19 at one point - Rinfret also follows up.
"I ask my investigators to go knock at the door of these establishments to see what is happening," she said.
What they have uncovered so far in dealing with specific cases is grave enough for the ombudsman to take broader action. Rinfret announced Tuesday that she islaunching an examination of how the ministry of health and social services handled the outbreak in the province's nursing homes.
"This systemic investigation is going to target residences for the elderly as a whole in Quebec, not just one residence, but all residences," Rinfret said, while noting her mandate is limited to public CHSLDs or private ones where local health authorities contract beds for patients. "The recommendations will be formulated for the health and social services network, so for the minister, the government, or parliamentarians, depending on the conclusions we reach."
The health ministry has already ordered up its own audit of what went wrong in long-term care homes and some have called for an inquiry. But Rinfret's probe promises to be wide in scope, independent and impartial (ie: more credible). It will also eventually be made public.
However, her recommendations are not binding. Perhaps if they were, the disaster that struck Quebec nursing homes due to COVID-19 might have been less severe.
In her 2017-18 annual report, Rinfret found that the personnel in CHSLDs struggled to keep up with their workload due to high levels of absenteeism, staff turnover, recruitment challenges and a staff-to-patient ratio that didn't take into account the heavy needs of some residents.
"It happens that services like weekly baths, dental hygiene, shaving and hair brushing are postponed," the ombudsman's report stated, adding that this frequent occurrence bordered on "mistreatment."
That same report flagged a CHSLD where residents were sometimes left in their beds for up to 36 hours.
It underscored the laxness of local health authorities failing to carry out the necessary inspections to certify the quality of care in private homes where it was sending frail elderly patients.
Rinfret's 2018-19 report again warned of these "recurrent problems" in CHSLDs.
Sound familiar?
These are among the factors that crippled Quebec's pandemic response in long-term care homes, leaving them woefully unprepared to deal with outbreaks and struggling to provide dignified care. Failures to distribute proper personal protective equipment and employees working in multiple facilities caused infections of patients and staff to skyrocket. At one point, 10,000 personnel were missing in action, forcing Premier François Legault to beg medical specialists, the army and later students to help change diapers and feed hungry seniors.
So far, 80 per cent of Quebec's 4,139 COVID-19 casualties have been in CHSLDs. And there is a risk a bad situation will get worse this week when a heat wave suffocates nursing homes, where just a third of residents have air-conditioned rooms - another well-known problem that has been largely ignored.
The investigations into the havoc wrought by the pandemic are yet to unfold, but many of the causes have been clearly foretold.
If only someone had acted on the early warning signs.
ahanes@postmedia.com
CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated the number of COVID-19 deaths in Quebec. There were 4,139 deaths in Quebec and 6,639 in Canada. The Gazette regrets the error.
Related
Allison Hanes: Save our seniors from COVID-19
Allison Hanes: Quebec is now paying the price for undervaluing caregivers
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 26 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

