As a heat wave threatens to worsen conditions inside Quebec's long-term care centres this week, advocates are calling on the provincial government to ensure every resident is protected from the hot weather.
But with the majority of the centres still not having air-conditioned rooms - and many fighting COVID-19 outbreaks? - ensuring everyone is properly sheltered from the heat and humidity will be challenging, Quebec's health minister acknowledged Monday.
The measures in place could mean many senior residents, already dealing with the stresses of the pandemic, will be confined to their rooms as temperatures are expected to reach upward of 30 Celsius in Montreal.
"It's inhumane, it's unsafe, it's uncomfortable and it's not the living environment that (Quebec) has talked about for so many years now," patient-rights advocate Paul Brunet, head of the Conseil pour la protection des malades, said of the lack of air conditioning in the centres.
"People should not have to suffer 35- or 37-degree heat in their room," he said. "Is that too much to ask?"
Despite repeated calls over the years, it's estimated that only one-third of rooms in Quebec's long-term care centres, or CHSLDs, have air conditioning.
During past heat waves, centres without air-conditioned rooms would move residents into cooler common areas to help them escape the heat. But that might not be an option this week as it would risk further spreading the virus among residents.
"It's going to be more complicated this year," Health Minister Danielle McCann said Monday during the government's daily COVID-19 briefing. "For the three days we're going to live (this week), we're going to do our best."
McCann said public health authorities are evaluating different possibilities, including having the centres establish two separate air-conditioned areas, with residents who've tested positive for COVID-19 being grouped together in one.
She said the government has also accelerated a plan to install outdoor, generator-powered units that would blow cold air into the buildings.
"We're working on it," McCann said. "We want it in place as soon as possible."
Concerns over the heat are not limited to the residents. They also extend to those already working under difficult conditions in the centres.
Alain Croteau, president of the orderlies union at the CIUSSS Centre-Sud-de-l'Île-de-Montréal, said many orderlies have already spoken out about getting too hot at work while wearing full personal protective equipment.
Croteau said centres also often direct them to avoid drinking water or using the washrooms - other than on their breaks - to limit the chances of getting infected when removing their protective equipment or lifting their masks and face shields. That won't be sustainable in 32-degree weather, Croteau warned.
"Something will need to give," he said.
Quebec Premier François Legault said Monday the government put aside $30 million a year and a half ago to install air-conditioned zones in the centres. As of Monday, 97 per cent of CHSLDs were equipped with them.
"Honestly, there's still work to be done," Legault said.
But Brunet said the government has no excuse for now finding itself scrambling to come up with solutions - advocates have been calling for more air-conditioned rooms in the centres for at least a decade, arguing it's a basic right.
Brunet's organization is in talks with lawyers to request a court order that would force all regional health authorities to provide decent temperatures in every CHSLD in Quebec. He believes it's a matter of life and death, noting that people die during heat waves each summer in Quebec
"We're going to lose people," Brunet said. "And each and every death that will occur because of the heat wave will be the government's responsibility."
jfeith@postmedia.com
Related
Parties and picnics on Mount Royal as restrictions are eased
'Very high temperatures' forecast for Montreal, Environment Canada warns
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 25 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

