About 200 people attended a vigil in the pouring, freezing rain Sunday in solidarity with the victims of the massacre in a Pittsburgh synagogue that killed 11( https://montrealgazette.com/news/crime/active-shooter-multiple-casualties-after-shooting-near-pittsburgh-synagogue/wcm/9f887ecb-b5be-487b-bbc4-9de4218e159d ).
Holding umbrellas, some stood silently while others sang on the sidewalk in front of the Montreal Holocaust Museum on Côte Ste-Catherine Rd. in Snowdon.
"We wanted to show our solidarity with the Jewish community in Pittsburgh here, with not only the Jewish community but also with other allies from the Muslim community, the black community and others as well," said co-organizer Sam Hersh, a member of Independent Jewish Voices, which opposes racism and supports Palestinian claims.
Hersh said he believed the massacre was at least partly related to the spread of hateful messages on social media and America's bitterly polarized political climate.
"It all has to do with this vitriolic rhetoric we're seeing in the United States, but there's also that sort of stuff going on in Canada to a certain extent," he said.
"I'm sad and frustrated, but I'm also emboldened to see the amount of support we got on a day like this," said Hersh, a political organizer who most recently worked on Monday's municipal election in Ottawa.
Imam Musabbir Alam, a co-founder of the Canadian Muslim Alliance, said he attended "to show solidarity with our Jewish brothers and sisters."
"All the houses of worship are sacred regardless of faith and we all share the same bond," he said.
Alam said Saturday's tragedy caused him to relive the massacre of six worshippers in Quebec City's Islamic Cultural Centre on Jan 29, 2017.
"I couldn't sleep last night," he said.
City councillor Craig Sauvé said he felt it was "so important to stand with the Jewish community after the tragedy and the terrorist acts of yesterday."
"We're all mind-boggled about how this continues to go on and how it seems to be accelerating," he said of hate crimes.
Sauvé said he thought the massacre was related to "this strange post-truth era" in which certain minorities are demonized.
"We've seen it before in Cambodia, in Nazi Germany, and more recently in Rwanda," he said.
"I'm very worried," he added.
Meanwhile, the city's institutional Jewish community, including Federation CJA and CIJA-Québec, is organizing a vigil Monday evening at 7:30 at Beth Israel Beth Aaron Congregation in Côte St-Luc.
"None of us in North America have ever experienced anything like this," said Rabbi Reuben Poupko, spiritual leader of the synagogue at 6800 Mackle Rd.
Poupko, whose father, Rabbi Baruch Poupko, led Congregation Shaare Torah in Pittsburgh for more than 60 years, grew up a few blocks from the Tree of Life Congregation, where Saturday's massacre occurred, in the predominantly Jewish Squirrel Hill neighbourhood.
"I know the neighbourhood well, I know the synagogue well, I know the people very well, and it's a devastating tragedy," he said in an interview.
"Every Jew knows that it could have been any synagogue, and every synagogue this morning is a house of mourning," Poupko said.
"All I can tell you is we're heartbroken and outraged. Some people are fearful and worried while others are just trying to make sense of it. It's just an overwhelming sense of sadness and tragedy," he said.
Poupko said the tragedy is not just the product of a deranged loner, noting that statistics show a rise in acts of anti-Semitism( https://montrealgazette.com/news/anti-semitic-incidents-increase-for-second-consecutive-year-bnai-brith-reports ) during the past decade.
"Jews remain the most highly targeted religious minority in North America by a very, very large margin," he said.
"We are bedevilled by the extreme left, by the extreme right, by religious radicals, and those who seek to target Jews are unfortunately more than one in number," Poupko said.
"The best thing we can do is to strengthen the bonds that exist already between faith communities and to send a clear statement that people who propagate violence represent no one but themselves and they are not secretly being applauded by the mainstream, they are repudiated by all," he said.
Fo Niemi, executive director of the Centre for Research-Action on Race Relations (CRARR), also noted the parallels between the Pittsburgh tragedy and the Quebec City mosque massacre.
"I think the seeds of hate are present when we see the proliferation of hate messages and hate groups both online and in real time, and we have to take them very seriously and never say that this will not happen here," he said in an interview.
Niemi called on Quebec's political leaders to be careful about advocating any measures "that could be seen as inciting intolerance and discrimination towards religious minority groups."
"At the same time, I think that we have to step up measures to combat hate crime and hate groups in this province, especially hate online," he said.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
Related
29 charges for man accused of gunning down 11 during baby naming ceremony at synagogue( https://montrealgazette.com/news/crime/active-shooter-multiple-casualties-after-shooting-near-pittsburgh-synagogue/wcm/9f887ecb-b5be-487b-bbc4-9de4218e159d )
Montrealer charged with inciting hatred against Jewish people( https://montrealgazette.com/news/montrealer-charged-with-inciting-hatred-against-jewish-people )
Canadian politicians offer sympathies following Pittsburgh synagogue shooting( https://montrealgazette.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/canadian-politicians-offer-sympathies-following-pittsburgh-synagogue-shooting/wcm/bc4b7519-da35-4b01-b93b-cef493953338 )

