As thousands of teachers return to schools this week, Health Minister Christian Dubé said he's confident the government has a good plan in place to limit the spread of the coronavirus.
However, Dubé cautioned the situation is fragile, and the government is watching closely to see how it evolves when children go back to class in the next few weeks.
"We're a few days away from back to school," Dubé said Tuesday afternoon at a news conference in Montreal. "I think we're a bit like the parents and we're all anxious to see how it will work out. But on our side, we're confident it will go well."
He said the average of cases in the last seven days amounts to roughly 80 new cases per day, or 10 per million, which he said is an acceptable number for the moment, especially compared with other jurisdictions. The government gets more concerned when the number of cases grows to 160 per day, or 20 per million.
"We need to make sure that Quebecers will follow the rules because we're doing well right now," Dubé said. "But every day, we still have four, five or six outbreaks, and we have to monitor them closely. We see every day that these bushfires want to expand, and our job is to make sure it doesn't become a forest fire."
Public health director Horacio Arruda was asked at the same news conference about criticism of the government's back-to-school plan. A recent open letter by physicians and scientists who are parents of school-age children was particularly critical of the decision that masks are not required for students while in class.
Arruda said the government's plan was put together with experts and pediatricians, and that he's confident the rules put in place will help limit the spread of the virus.
"We found what we thought is a good balance, limiting the risk while promoting the development of children, which is very important," Arruda said. "I understand some people are concerned, but we are following this very closely, and if we have to tighten the measures, we will adjust."
Dubé played down the fact that more than 400 teachers at the Centre de services scolaire
de Montréal (formerly the Commission scolaire de Montréal) have been given permission to stay home because of a fear of contracting the virus.
"We have 100,000 teachers; you're talking about 400," he said. "We need to prove over the next few days that our measures will work, but we can't do that ourselves. It's teamwork. If you ask me, 'Is it normal that 400 teachers are nervous and are asking questions?', I would say to you it's normal."
Dubé said he's confident teachers and school administrators can put in place innovative measures to limit the spread of the virus, as nurses have already done in hospitals by retrofitting workstations sometimes with duct tape, if necessary.
"We are at war," Dubé said. "I think we need to understand where we are starting from. We have hospitals that are still in bad shape, but people have been able to do miracles with that. I think it's the same thing with schools. We know from the start that 54 per cent of our schools are in bad shape, and we have been investing. We understand that, but those kids need to be in school; they need socialization. They need to learn. Let's reassure (teachers)."
"I'm crossing my fingers for the first week," Dubé added. "Then, after it goes by, we'll see what happens and adjust."
Arruda said the measures in place allow teachers to have access to protection for times when they can't maintain two metres of distance from their students.
"The most important is two metres distance, and wear a mask if you can't respect it, and wash your hands," he said.
Also at Tuesday's news conference, the Legault government confirmed it is dropping the idea of asking Quebecers to download a COVID-19 tracing application on their phones.
But it has not ruled out trying such an app in the future should the pandemic situation worsen.
Quebec's minister of governmental digital transformation, Éric Caire, made the announcement, and said traditional methods of tracing COVID-19 infections, in which health workers track down the contacts of a person who was infected, are adequate.
"Because the pandemic is under control at the moment, we have decided not to go ahead with it," Caire said. "But we are readying the groundwork so we can roll it out quickly if we need it."
Caire said rolling out the app now would be the equivalent of "putting out a brush fire with a water-bomber aircraft."
The government's decision comes despite the fact Quebecers said they were interested in the idea of an app in a recent consultation.
The drive to deploy an app fell apart in early August after experts appeared before a committee of the National Assembly studying the idea.
The experts told the committee - made up of MNAs of all stripes - that there were big questions about the safety, reliability and efficiency of such apps. Nearly all the 18 experts expressed doubts about the technology.
jmagder@postmedia.com
twitter.com/jasonmagder
Related
Quebec hearings: Red flags over 'unproven' COVID-19 tracing technology
Quebec needs to streamline COVID testing and contact tracing: scientist
'Your teacher is not giving you a hug': School returns, while anxiety and hope remain
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

