It was around Christmastime that May Chiu's climate depression really took hold.
The Montreal lawyer and mother of two was greatly alarmed by the International Panel on Climate Change report released revealing the devastating effects of global warming will be felt sooner and at a lower temperature than previously realized. Without drastic action, United Nations scientists warned, humanity faces drought, hunger, extreme weather and crop failure - within our children's lifetimes, if not our own.
"My daughter is 13. She asked me: 'Mom, tell me the truth, how much time do we have left?' What do I tell her?" Chiu said. "I started to feel like maybe I should just run up a huge debt and live hedonistically with the time I have left."
Instead, she channelled her despair into a new group joining the fight for urgent action on climate change. Extinction Rebellion just held its first public demonstrations in Montreal. On Tuesday, members hosted a teach-in at McGill College Ave. and Sherbrooke St. On Wednesday, six members chained themselves to the front doors( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-extinction-rebellion-members-chain-themselves-to-premiers-montreal-office ) of Premier François Legault's office building.
Extinction Rebellion originated in the United Kingdom. It espouses non-violent direct action and civil disobedience. The same day Montrealers risked arrest outside Legault's office, protesters in Londonblocked train lines and disrupted traffic( https://montrealgazette.com/news/world/uk-climate-protesters-block-roads-glue-themselves-to-train/wcm/d1f062b2-68c8-49ab-b4be-4432bf58f865 ) - part of a mobilization taking place in 80 cities and 30 countries leading up the Earth Day, April 22.
Earth Day is typically a feel-good occasion where schoolchildren learn about recycling and community groups plant trees. But this year it feels decidedly sombre - and deadly serious. Since the IPCC report, the prognosis for the planet has worsened. Canada is warming twice as fast as the rest of the world; the north, three times as fast.
Citizens around the world have started to panic as scientists warn we have maybe 12 years to turn things around. Montreal has become a hotbed of such activism, in many cases by people who weren't climate warriors before. Mobilizing, it turns out, is one way to ease their climate anxiety.
Days after the IPCC report landed, Dominic Champagne attended a gloomy dinner party that convinced him he had to do something. The Quebec theatre producer launched the Pacte pour la transition( https://www.lepacte.ca/en/the-pact/ ), a pledge for citizens to reduce their carbon footprint and a demand that government take steps on a societal level to slash emissions and end our dependency on fossil fuels.
Champagne leveraged his connections( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-a-new-social-contract-to-fight-climate-change-in-quebec ) getting Quebec celebrities to sign on and the general public took it up in great number. He also helped organize a protest that brought 50,000 Montrealers to the streets on a few day's notice. His influence earned him a meeting with a then-newly elected Legault.
The initial flurry of activity has not abated. Champagne is in demand as a speaker, touring the province to visit schools and CEGEPs on his own dime. The pact has more than 270,000 signatures.
But six months on, he feels a growing sense of futility.
"Do we have to wait until the violence of nature becomes more brutal still? How many more floods will it take? How many more forest fires? How much of our well-being has to be sacrificed before we move?" he said on the eve of Earth Day. "I don't have the answers."
Young people have been at the forefront of Montreal efforts to sound the alarm about the climate emergency, even some who aren't yet old enough to vote.
Sara Montpetit, a 17-year-old student at Robert Gravel high school, has emerged as Montreal's answer to Greta Thunberg, the Swedish teen whose solitary protests and searing words have made her a symbol of her generation's hopes, fears and anger about climate change.
Inspired by Thunberg, Montpetit has been leading weekly strikesl. A few hundred students skip school every Friday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-youth-turn-panic-into-action-with-another-climate-march ) and converge on Jeanne Mance Park.
Squeezing in a telephone interview during her lunch break, Montpetit said she thinks political leaders have taken note of young Montrealers' message, but seem to treat their passion as a passing fad.
"They don't take us seriously. They think we're dreamers or we're idealists," she said. "But they're the idealists if they think we can continue the way we're going."
Though she's frequently fed up, Montpetit is buoyed by her generation's commitment to the cause, especially their efforts to convince their parents of the crisis. Her own parents will soon take their last airline trip. Montpetit already refuses to fly because of the emissions air travel generates.
"It's not really their fault. That's the system they were brought up with," she said. "This is a revolution of young people. But the only generation that can act is the one that's in charge now."
Members of Extinction Rebellion chained themselves to the doors of the building housing the premier's Montreal office on April 17.
Despite its more radical tactics, Extinction Rebellion isn't made up of typical radicals. It counts bankers and academics( https://on.ft.com/2UH9OUJ ) as adherents. Its commitment to non-violence means parents often bring their children along.
"We're really a cross-section of society. We have filmmakers, we have artists, we have teachers. I'm a lawyer," Chiu said. "We have people in their 60s. Serge, one of the guys who chained himself to Legault's door, is 82."
Chiu said Extinction Rebellion held its first meetings in Montreal in January and is ready to make its presence felt. It held workshops on civil disobedience - though only members willing to be arrested sign up for riskier operations, and held sessions on the psychological toll of climate change.
Chiu said she would ordinarily be out in the streets protesting against Bill 21( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/bill-21 ), the Quebec government's proposed ban on religious garb for some public employees, which critics have lambasted as legalized discrimination. But Chiu said she believes it's a distraction meant to divert attention from the real crisis gripping the planet.
"Climate change is already upon us," said Chiu. "The clock is ticking."
After the terrifying IPCC report, Normand Beaudet, too, heard the call to arms. He began mobilizing citizens across Quebec to get their municipalities to declare a climate emergency.
The grass-roots initiative caught on faster than expected. To date, 330 local governments -including Communauté metropolitaine de Montréal( https://ici.radio-canada.ca/nouvelle/1134054/declaration-urgence-climatique-cmm-valerie-plante-andre-belisle ) representing about half the population of Quebec - have signed the Déclaration universelle d'urgence climatique( https://www.groupmobilisation.com/la-duc ).
"That was the easy part," Beaudet said. "The hard part is passing to action."
Work on a toolbox for citizens to bring to their municipalities was accelerated. Last week, a list of 11 areas to act on( https://www.chantiersdeladuc.com/ ) was unveiled, like sustainable urban planning and low-emissions construction.
"We're going to have to make this transition one way or the other," Beaudet said. "The questions is, do we bring about the necessary changes ourselves or will they be forced on us?"
Back in February, Louis Couillard had tears in his eyes explaining how he came to help organize a major climate strike in Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-quebec-students-poised-to-strike-over-climate-change ) as part of the collective La Planète s'invite a l'université.
The rally, held March 15, drew 150,000 students( https://montrealgazette.com/news/picketing-montreal-students-force-some-schools-to-close-ahead-of-climate-change-march ) to the streets of Montreal, not only from university and CEGEP, but from high school and primary schools. It is believed to be the largest of the strikes attended by 1.5 million young people around the world that day.
"We were really proud," said Couillard this week while studying for exams at Université de Montréal. "But it can't end there."
A meeting the students clinched with Quebec Environment Minister Benoît Charette didn't yield the results they were hoping for.
"I think part of the message was heard," Couillard said. "But the part of the message that hasn't been received is the urgency of acting."
Young people aren't giving up, though, he said. They will regroup and strategize over the summer. There is a climate demonstration set for Montreal April 27, to cap off Earth Week, and another student strike planned for Sept. 29.
"We have hope because we're taking action ourselves," Couillard said. "To anyone out there feeling that eco-anxiety, I've felt it. I know it's really easy to roll up in a little ball at home and be depressed about the future. But the moment I started feeling better was the moment I got out there and started doing something about it."
ahanes@postmedia.com( mailto:ahanes@postmedia.com )
Related
Allison Hanes: Let's hope our children's concerns don't fall on deaf ears( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-lets-hope-our-childrens-concerns-dont-fall-on-deaf-ears )
Allison Hanes: Devastating climate change is on our doorstep( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-devastating-climate-change-is-on-our-doorstep )

