Here's what happened while the Habs lost - again( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-7dad ).
Montreal police are seeking possible victims of a man arrested for allegedly pressuring girls to send him explicit photos( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-police-seek-possible-victims-in-sexual-exploitation-case ). The SPVM's sexual exploitation unit arrested Marc-Antoine Corbeil, 23, on Jan. 22. Police believe Corbeil contacted girls and women on social media posing as a 14-year-old girl. He did not meet with any of his alleged victims. The suspect used the pseudonyms mégane.dupuis and megane.lalonde to contact his alleged victims and persuade them to send photos and videos. If they refused to send more, he would allegedly threaten to send the ones he already had to all their social media contacts. Police are asking anyone who may be a victim of this crime to call 911 or go to a local police station to make a report.
The association representing Quebec's English school boards is considering a legal challenge to Bill 40( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/bill-40-english-school-boards-considering-a-legal-challenge ). Passed on Saturday, Bill 40 replaces school boards with service centres. The government is allowing some members of the English service centre boards to be elected in order to fulfill the requirement in the Canadian Constitution that minority official language communities retain control of their school systems. But the Quebec English School Boards Association isn't convinced the new law fulfils those constitutional requirements. "There are a number of articles in the bill that give the minister powers to change various elements in cabinet rather than through new legislation," QESBA vice-president Noel Burke told the Montreal Gazette. "In particular, who qualifies as a candidate and who qualifies as an elector is a critical issue for us with respect to Article 23 of the Constitution."
A foam spill wreaked bubbly, bubbly havoc at Manassas Regional Airport in Virginia. Officials said( https://www.facebook.com/cityofmanassas/posts/2713285095404718?__tn__=-R ) a malfunctioning fire suppression system had caused a hangar to fill with foam, which then spilled out onto an access road. It looked like the combination of a bubble bath and snow storm. Anyhow, the road had to be closed while all the foam was cleared.
The foam spill at Manassas Regional Airport

