Mike Picciuto didn't intend on being the first person in line to get his son into Edinburgh School - it just worked out that way.
"I did this involuntarily," Picciuto said Saturday morning, after spending the night in his car, parked in front of the school. "I came to the school to find out how many spots were left after sibling registration and found out there were 17 spots. I came back out and phoned my wife, and someone pulled up beside me and said: 'Are you waiting in line?' I said: 'I guess I am now.' Within a half an hour, there were six of us."
Picciuto, who lives two blocks from the school, began standing in line Friday afternoon( https://montrealgazette.com/news/its-madness-parents-lining-up-ahead-of-monday-school-registration ) so his son Sal could get one of the limited spots available for new kindergarten students next September. He plans to be in front of the school until Monday morning when the school opens its doors for registration.
Picciuto wrote his name on a paper posted on the school's front door, his waiting period starting around 5 p.m. Friday. By Saturday morning, 12 other parents were also in line, and by Sunday evening, two more had joined the lineup. This is the second year in a row parents have been lining up for a spot in Edinburgh, though last year, parents only started their campout on the day before school registration began.
Andrea Plaumbo, left, Mike Picciuto and Adrienne Winrow wait outside the front door of Edinburgh Elementary School in Montreal in anticipation of getting a place for their children starting kindergarten on Sunday.
Edinburgh has been dealing with an overcrowding problem for several years, and while the school board has said it could add temporary classrooms or accommodate students in a nearly empty school nearby, nothing has so far been decided. If no extra places are created, there will likely only be 17 spots for new students in two kindergarten classes next year, as siblings get priority. That's up from 12 spots last year.
Picciuto said he was spending the whole weekend parked in his car in front of the school because he wants his two sons, age 5 and 3, to be in a French immersion program.
"It's the only French immersion school in the district. I think in this day and age it's ridiculous that we have to do this, but it's a good community. They make it very easy. It has been peaceful and fun. These are good people."
Andrea Palumbo and her husband were taking turns doing 12-hour shifts over the weekend in a bid to secure two places for their four-and-a-half-year-old twin girls at the school.
"Edinburgh was my own elementary school and we moved back to the area with the hope that they would go here. So there's an element of nostalgia," she said, when asked why it is so important that her kids go to this school.
As they shivered in the cold, snow, and later Sunday, freezing rain, Palumbo said parents had a lot of time to discuss why the board has not introduced a better system for deciding who gets the spaces. An online system or a lottery would be better than having people wait outside in severe winter weather, she said, adding it is "excessive" and possibly dangerous.
"It would only take one incident for this not to be seen as a positive PR exercise," she added.
Cars parked on Hudson Ave. in front of the school had yellow Bristol boards propped up on the windshields bearing the names of those waiting and their number on the list.
Edinburgh's governing board had been trying to avoid such a scenario, working with the English Montreal School Board since June to try to free up more space. It asked the EMSB if it could take over nearby Mountainview School, which is 400 metres away, but the school board decided the at-risk high school students who attend Mountainview need their own building.
The board has not yet responded to a request to install portable, modular classrooms( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/parents-at-emsbs-edinburgh-school-seek-modular-classrooms-to-ease-overcrowding ) at Edinburgh, and if that request is accepted a third kindergarten class will be opened and there will be ample room to accept more students.
"Why is this happening again this year when it was predictable and preventable? It's a bit silly to say the least," said Adrienne Winrow, No. 10 on the list for a place at Edinburgh.
She worries about elitism.
"The public schools are supposed to be accessible to all," Winrow said. "We are people who have partners, families, cars that can keep us warm all night. One family who couldn't be here constantly has (paid) people to fill in for them. That takes resources that not everyone has. There are single parents who don't have access to resources that would allow them to do this for three nights and three days. That's inequitable."
But Edinburgh isn't the only school dealing with overcrowding. About 20 people were waiting in their cars outside Merton School in Côte-St-Luc Sunday evening, in a lineup that began just before 6 a.m..
Ali Maislin sits in her car outside of Merton School in Côte-St-Luc in anticipation of getting a place for her child starting kindergarten on Sunday.
Ali Maislin, first in line, said the parents were told there would be two kindergartens of 21 children each, and that siblings of kids already at the school had priority. That meant one classroom was already full.
"So that leaves about 20 spots left for a zoned school, for the only decent public school in the English Montreal School Board in this zone, so you gotta do what you gotta do," Maislin said.
She was worried about the dangers of parents waiting in freezing temperatures.
"I hope it's not going to take a catastrophe for the school board to look at change," she said. But she added that some parents are concerned that a lottery, or an online sign-up system might be open to tampering.
"A lot parents stand by this system. They say this is the only way to keep it 100 per cent honest and clean," she said.
Parents keep warm with a fire, and entertained watching the Super bowl in front of Royal Vale School in anticipation of getting a place for their children starting kindergarten on Sunday.
At Royal Vale School - also in N.D.G. - where parents have been lining up for roughly the last 30 years( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/parents-camp-out-at-royal-vale-school-for-precious-kindergarten-spots ), the atmosphere was almost festive on Sunday evening. Some parents had pitched tents, others were huddled around a bonfire watching the Super Bowl, which someone had managed to stream from a cell phone and project onto a white blanket.
On the door of the school was a hand-drawn list with 36 names on it, each hoping to snag one of 40 spots expected to be available next September.
Erik Nisbet wasn't aware of a pact made on Facebook by prospective parents to hold off on camping out until at least Saturday. He showed up with his tent on Friday to be first in line.
"I'm not on social media and, apparently, there was a huge group that decided not to camp out on Friday. I didn't know about that, but I was told by several people to get here early. I heard there would only be 17 spots, so the pressure was on," said Nisbet. "I was called all sorts of names when people saw me here, but people can be angry at me all they want. I just want to do what I can so my son gets a good education."
EMSB spokesperson Mike Cohen said the lineups are a good sign schools are offering excellent education options that are popular with parents.
"It's the greatest form of flattery," Cohen said. "We have been asked: 'Can't you do something for the parents and let them inside the school for the weekend?' People have to understand our registration is Monday morning. We don't advertise that people have to sleep on the street. We simply say for the whole system, that's when registration begins. There happens to be a growing number of schools that are extremely popular, and parents know that if they go sleep outside, there's an honour system and that will be a way for them to get into the school. We don't discourage it, but we don't promote it."
Cohen said there could be more space available next year because the board has proposed moving students out of the nearly empty Coronation School and using that as an annex( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/emsb-wont-open-new-school-but-offers-plan-to-ease-west- end -overcrowding ) for one of the schools that is dealing with overcrowding. The board has proposed either Merton, Willingdon or Edinburgh take over the building and use it as a junior campus for kindergarten to Grade 2. Students in Grade 3 to 6 would remain in the existing school, which means siblings could be separated. The governing boards of the three schools will discuss the plan and the EMSB will make a final decision on which school would get to use Coronation as an annex by Feb. 20.
Related
Parents brave frigid temps to snag Royal Vale kindergarten spots( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/parents-camp-out-at-royal-vale-school-for-precious-kindergarten-spots )
EMSB won't open new school, but offers plan to ease West End overcrowding( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/emsb-wont-open-new-school-but-offers-plan-to-ease-west- end -overcrowding )
jmagder@postmedia.com( mailto:jmagder@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/jasonmagder( http://twitter.com/jasonmagder )
facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist( http://facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist )

