Montreal Gazette journalist Aaron Derfel has been nominated for a National Newspaper Award for exposing violence against workers at the Montreal General Hospital.
Called Hospital (In)security( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hospital-insecurity-anatomy-of-a-nurse-attack-at-montreal-general ), the four-part series published starting in January 2018 chronicled a 2017 incident in which a nurse in the psychiatric emergency room was violently attacked and almost killed by a patient at 3:35 a.m., and a security guard was not present because the hospital had determined that one was not necessary. The investigation showed the hospital had more incidents but less security than comparable institutions( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hospital-insecurity-new-safety-concerns-arise-at-montreal-general ), scaled back proposed training to deal with such incidents( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hospital-insecurity-montreal-general-scales-back-code-white-training-plan ), and that such acts of violence were far from rare( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hospital-insecurity-when-a-nurse-is-attacked-others-suffer-too ).
"It is quite an honour to receive this recognition," Derfel said. "I'd like to thank my sources in the health network who showed great courage in speaking out about such an important matter of public interest."
Derfel's nomination in the investigations category( http://nna-ccj.ca/finalists-announced-for-the-70th-national-newspaper-awards/ ) is among 14 for Postmedia's journalists for the awards recognizing excellence in daily newspaper work in Canada.
Zane Schwartz was nominated in the prestigious Project of the Year category for Follow The Money( https://special.nationalpost.com/follow-the-money/feature ), an 18-month-long investigative project he worked on as the recipient of Postmedia's 2017 Michelle Lang Fellowship in Journalism. Schwartz gathered 5 million records from governments across the country to create the first searchable database of federal, provincial and territorial political donations.
The Saskatoon StarPhoenix received three nominations, with Kevin Mitchell recognized for his coverage of the Humboldt Broncos bus crash and its aftermath and Kayle Neis nominated in the news photo category for a photo of a Broncos memorial. StarPhoenix editor-in-chief Heather Persson was also nominated for editorial writing.
Postmedia journalists in Calgary, Ottawa, Edmonton, Vancouver and London also received nominations.
"This year's nominations reflect the excellent work that is being done in our newsrooms across the country," said Lucinda Chodan, vice-president editorial for Postmedia. "The categories we are nominated in - from editorial writing and photography to investigative and explanatory work - are a testament to the breadth and strength of the journalism we practise."
The Globe and Mail secured the most nominations with 20, followed by the Toronto Star and Montreal's La Presse, each nominated six times.
The National Newspaper Awards, celebrating their 70th year, will be handed out at a ceremony in Toronto on May 3. The awards are given to daily newspapers, news agencies and online news sites that the NNA board of governors approve for entry.
Full list of nominees
Arts and Entertainment: Jonathan Dekel, Globe and Mail, for a feature about how the members of Radiohead continue to deal with the death of one of their crew members when a stage collapsed in Toronto almost seven years ago. Chris Hannay and Daniel Leblanc, Globe and Mail, for investigating the National Gallery of Canada's botched attempt to sell a major piece of art by Marc Chagall in order to free up money to buy another artwork. Fanny Levesque, Katia Gagnon and Veronique Lauzon, La Presse, for exposing how the head of the Montreal Symphony Orchestra used his authority to engage in psychological harassment and sometimes physical aggression against musicians.
Beat Reporting: Zosia Bielski, Globe and Mail, for coverage of gender and sexuality. David Pugliese, Ottawa Citizen, for coverage of the national defence beat. Randy Richmond, London Free Press, for coverage of Ontario's correctional system.
Breaking News: The Canadian Press, for team coverage of the truck-bus collision that killed 16 members of the Humboldt Broncos organization. Charles-Antoine Gagnon, Louis-Denis Ebacher, Jean-Simon Milette, Daniel LeBlanc and Mathieu Belanger, Le Droit, for coverage of a tornado that struck the Ottawa-Gatineau region. The Toronto Star, for team coverage of a shocking incident when a man driving a van mowed down pedestrians on Yonge Street, killing 10 of them.
Business: Jeff Lewis, Jeffrey Jones, Renata D'Aliesio and Chen Wang, Globe and Mail, for digging deeply into the flourishing trade of aging wells, in which major companies routinely offload energy assets burdened with hefty cleanup costs onto smaller players with scant ability to pay the environmental bill. Paul Waldie, Globe and Mail, for an investigation that revealed how Canadian corporate money helped to finance Islamic State terrorism abroad. Geoffrey York, Globe and Mail, for finding evidence of questionable conduct and connections to corruption in South African business deals made by Bombardier and Export Development Canada.
Columns: Nathalie Petrowski, La Presse; Niigaan Sinclair, Winnipeg Free Press; Russell Wangersky, St. John's Telegram.
Editorial Cartooning: Michael de Adder, Halifax Chronicle-Herald/Brunswick News/Toronto Star; Brian Gable, Globe and Mail; Garnotte (Michel Garneau), Le Devoir.
Editorials: Francois Cardinal, La Presse; Heather Persson, Saskatoon StarPhoenix; John Roe, Waterloo Region Record.
Explanatory Work: Carolyn Abraham, Globe and Mail, for "Cracks in the Code," which explored how science's ability to "read" DNA has far outpaced its capacity to understand it. James Bagnall, Ottawa Citizen, for a thorough explanation of how the federal government managed to end up with its deeply flawed, and very expensive, Phoenix employee pay system. Douglas Quan, National Post, for discovering how the municipal government in Richmond, B.C., was dealing with cultural challenges it faces as the "most Asian" city in North America.
Feature Photo: Chris Donovan, Globe and Mail, for a photo of a woman saying farewell to a friend just before her medically assisted death. Andrew Vaughan, Canadian Press, for a photo of fog shrouding the waterfront during flooding in Fredericton. Gavin Young, Calgary Herald/Calgary Sun, for an image depicting an oasis of calm on the otherwise raucous Calgary Stampede midway.
International: Daniel Dale, Toronto Star, for his exhaustive coverage of the deceptions and lies of U.S. President Donald Trump. Stephanie Nolen, Globe and Mail, for her reporting on Brazil, from environmental challenges to social and political developments. Nathan VanderKlippe, Globe and Mail, for an on-the-ground look at China's crackdown on Uyghurs and repression of Muslim observance.
Investigations: Aaron Derfel, Montreal Gazette, for uncovering shocking information about violent acts committed against health-care workers at Montreal General Hospital, and the institution's attempts to cover up the incidents. Grant LaFleche, St. Catharines Standard, for a year-long investigation that uncovered a political conspiracy to manipulate the hiring of Niagara Region's top bureaucrat and a secret contract worth more than a million dollars. Wendy Stueck and Mike Hager, Globe and Mail, for a series exposing the deplorable conditions in many rental buildings in Vancouver's low-income Downtown Eastside, and failed efforts by the city to enforce its bylaws.
Local Reporting: Erin DeBooy, Brandon Sun, for an unflinching look at the personal and human toll caused by methamphetamine use in her community. Grant LaFleche, St. Catharines Standard, for a year-long investigation that uncovered a political conspiracy to manipulate the hiring of Niagara Region's top bureaucrat and a secret contract worth more than a million dollars. Greg Mercer, Waterloo Region Record, for a detailed probe into the serious health problems that afflicted workers from the region's once-booming rubber industry, and the apparent reluctance of workplace safety officials to accept their compensation claims.
Long Feature: Isabelle Hachey, La Presse, for a feature about an amazing medical feat: the first facial transplant in Canada. Jana G. Pruden, Globe and Mail, for a story on the aftermath of a fire that left three people dead, and a family destroyed. Grant Robertson, Globe and Mail, for a feature about an experiment in which three lab monkeys were quietly moved to a sanctuary to retire, instead of facing the death sentence that awaits most animals used in medical research.
News Photo: Jonathan Hayward, Canadian Press, for a photo of a man who salvaged his friend's prized electric guitars after a flood in Grand Forks, B.C. Darren Makowichuk, Calgary Herald/Calgary Sun, for an image of police officers tending to a fallen comrade. Kayle Neis, Saskatoon StarPhoenix, for a photo of hockey sticks stuck in a snowbank as a memorial to members of the Humboldt Broncos who had been killed in a bus-truck collision.
Photo Essay: Carlos Osorio, Toronto Star, for photos accompanying a feature story about a 77-year-old woman who was forced to move out of the publicly subsidized building she lived in when it was deemed unsafe. Renaud Philippe, Globe and Mail, for pictures documenting the plight of the Rohingya and their escape from genocide in Myanmar. Melissa Tait, Globe and Mail, for an essay about a rugby league that strengthens relationships among its women players, and provides support for families.
Politics: Lori Culbert, Dan Fumano and Joanne Lee-Young, Vancouver Sun/The Province, for an in-depth look at what governments had done and were promising to do about affordable housing in one of the world's most expensive cities. Robert Fife, Steven Chase, Sean Silcoff and Christine Dobby, Globe and Mail, for looking into how Huawei fits in with Beijing's global ambitions, and just how far Canada was willing to go to accommodate the technology juggernaut's quest for expansion. Greg Mercer, Waterloo Region Record, for exposing how the Ontario Conservative party concocted a story that a legislator had sexually harassed a former party intern, in order to nominate a more well-connected party insider.
Presentation: Laura Blenkinsop and Christopher Manza, Globe and Mail, for their work showcasing a Brazilian road trip, a major investigation and a true crime saga. Jean-Francois Codere and Maxime Jean, La Presse, for a highly interactive presentation accompanying a story about a nearly disastrous Air Canada flight. Cameron Tulk, David Schnitman, Tania Pereira and Fadi Yaacoub, Toronto Star, for bringing to life a research project in which reporters fact-checked every question and answer over five days of Question Period, to find out just how much federal politicians speak the truth.
Project of the Year: Jessica Botelho-Urbanski, Melissa Martin and Katie May, Winnipeg Free Press, for "Ice Storm: Manitoba's Meth Crisis," a seven-part series documenting how methamphetamine was ravaging Winnipeg and destroying lives. Zane Schwartz, National Post/Calgary Herald, for "Follow the Money," an 18-month project that gathered and analyzed more than five million records across Canada to create the first central, searchable database of political donations in every province and territory. A Toronto Star team for "Medical Disorder," an 18-month effort to collect, analyze and report on 27,000 discipline records and 1.4 million licensing records for doctors practising in Canada and the United States.
Short Feature: Jamie Ross, Globe and Mail, for a piece, in the wake of the fatal Humboldt Broncos bus-truck crash, that explained what playing junior hockey meant to him as he was transitioning from youth to adult and trying to find his way in life. Jon Wells, Hamilton Spectator, for an engaging and poignant story about a couple's determination to see a man freed from death row in the U.S. for a crime he said he did not commit. Patrick White, Globe and Mail, for a story about a humble, rural attraction - a simple sunflower patch - that had been ruined by a social media mob.
Sports: Dan Barnes, Edmonton Journal/Edmonton Sun, for reporting on the sad tale of Dorian Boose, who played in the NFL and won a championship with the CFL's Edmonton Eskimos, only to end up living on the streets and eventually taking his own life. Kevin Mitchell, Saskatoon StarPhoenix, for deep coverage, spanning a period of months, on the Humboldt Broncos bus-truck crash and its aftermath. Mary Ormsby, Toronto Star, for uncovering new information that suggested sprinter Ben Johnson's drug sample had been mishandled 30 years earlier, and for a story outlining the cognitive decline and personal turmoil faced by legendary boxer George Chuvalo.
Sports Photo: Bernard Brault, La Presse, for an image of acrobatic Olympic skiers awaiting results while one of their fellow competitors soars overhead. Ed Kaiser, Edmonton Journal/Edmonton Sun, for a picture showing a Vancouver Canucks player flying through the air as he attempts a shot on goal.Andrew Vaughan, Canadian Press, for a photo of a downed fighter that captures the brutality of mixed martial arts.

