Globe and Mail leads with the most nominations
? The Globe and Mail leads the pack of finalists with 15 nominations for the 2009 National Newspaper Awards to be announced May 14 in Toronto, closely followed by the Toronto Star which has 14 finalists.
The Edmonton Journal and Montreal's La Presse have six nominations each. The Hamilton Spectator had four and The Canadian Press earned three nominations The Ottawa Citizen, Kingston Whig-Standard, New Brunswick Telegraph Journal and National Post had two each.
The Guelph Mercury, Halifax Chronicle-Herald, London Free Press, Montreal Gazette, Reuters, Sault Ste. Marie Star, Woodstock Sentinel-Review, Vancouver Province, Victoria Times Colonist, and Windsor Star have one each.
The 66 finalists in the 22 categories were announced on March 15, from the National Newspaper Awards office in Toronto.
There were 1,301 entries in this year's competition for works that appeared in 2009.
In all, 20 news organizations have been nominated.
Winners will receive cheques for $1,000 and a certificate of award. Runners-up receive citations of merit.
This is the 21st year for the NNAs under a board of governors which includes editors, publishers and the public from across Canada as well as representatives from the Toronto Press Club. Prior to 1989, the NNAs had been sponsored by the Toronto Press Club. The awards are administered from the National Newspaper Awards office in Toronto.
The National Newspaper Awards were founded by The Toronto Press Club in 1949.
Highlights:
Bruno Schlumberger of the Ottawa Citizen has been nominated in Feature Photo and News Feature Photo.
Carlos Osorio of the Toronto Star has been nominated twice, in Feature Photo and News Photo.
Steve Buist of the Hamilton Spectator also has two nominations, in Investigations and Sports Reporting.
Michelle Shephard of the Toronto Star has been nominated twice, in Beats and International Reporting.
Rob Tripp of the Kingston Whig-Standard has two nominations, in Local Reporting with colleague Paul Schliesmann and in Beats.
Graeme Smith of the Globe and Mail has been nominated for a third-consecutive year in International Reporting.
Michele Ouimet of La Presse has been nominated for a third-consecutive year.
Marty Klinkenberg of the New Brunswick Telegraph-Journal has been nominated for a third-straight year.
Jennifer Wells of the Toronto Star has two nominations this year, one for Short Features and the other for Business Reporting.
The nominees:
Multimedia Feature: The Canadian Press on the impact of nanotechnology on humans; the Globe and Mail for a study of the lives of women in Afghanistan; Toronto Star for report of the Toronto school board's long-term support programs for expelled students.
Behind the Veil
News Feature Photography: Pawel Dwulit of the Toronto Star for a photo of a child wiping tears from a father's eyes after his son was killed outside a convenience store; Darryl Dyck of The Canadian Press for a shot of grounded helicopter pilots watching as a B.C. forest fire rages in the distance; Bruno Schlumberger of the Ottawa Citizen for a photo of an 85-year-old war veteran in the late afternoon light at a war memorial ceremony.
Beat Reporting: Michelle Shephard, Toronto Star, for her national security beat; Jodie Sinnema, Edmonton Journal, for health reporting; Rob Tripp, Kingston Whig-Standard, for crime-justice coverage.
Explanatory Work: Stephanie Nolen, the Globe and Mail, for a story of why children in India are dying of malnutrition despite that nation's economic prosperity; Catherine Porter, Toronto Star, for the story of the movement of a case of strawberries from California to their destinations in the Toronto area; Paul Waldie and Grant Robertson of the Globe and Mail for a story on the history of vaccine and how it has become an economic powerhouse.
If India is booming, why are its children still starving?
Politics: Stephen Maher of the Halifax Chronicle-Herald for stories that got former natural resources minister Lisa Raitt in trouble; Paula Simons of the Edmonton Journal for columns about the Alberta government's anti-gay amendments to the Human Rights Act; James Travers of the Toronto Star for an article on the undermining of Parliament and other democratic institutions.
Short Features: Agnes Gruda of La Presse in Montreal for a piece on an Congolese immigrant woman separated from her children for a long stretch because of bureaucratic delays; Tom Blackwell of the National Post for a story on the information gleaned from autopsies on slain Canadian soldiers and how that information can protect those still fighting the Afghan war; Jennifer Wells, Toronto Star, for a story on impresario Garth Drabinsky's conviction for fraud.
Local Reporting: Scott Tracey, Rob O'Flanagan and Nicole O'Reilly of the Guelph Mercury for an investigation of the local gravel industry; Rob Tripp and Paul Schliesmann of the Kingston Whig-Standard for stories of the mysterious death of four Montreal women in an alleged honour killing; Elliot Ferguson and Bruce Urquhart of the Woodstock Sentinel-Review for the coverage of the abduction and murder of schoolgirl Tori Stafford.
Special Project: The Hamilton Spectator for a project on The Way We Spend which spoke directly to the needs of readers in a frightening economy; Vancouver Province for Operation Phoenix, a community project in search of solutions and hope for the notorious downtown eastside; Windsor Star for Fallen Angels, a series that linked a Windsor charity in Haiti to the worldwide phenomenon of sex tourism.
Sports Photography: Mike Cassese of Reuters for a photo of a ballplayer fouling the ball off his cheek; Ed Kaiser, Edmonton Journal, for photo of a racecar driver preparing to flee his car that caught fire in the pit lane; Chris Schwarz, Edmonton Journal, for a football action shot of a defender illegally pulling the helmet off the ballcarrier.
Business: Jacquie McNish, Greg Keenan, and Janet McFarland of the Globe and Mail for stories on Nortel's continuing saga and the impact on pensioners; Shawn McCarthy and Nathan VanderKlippe, the Globe and Mail for reporting on the quest for a clean oil industry; Jennifer Wells, Toronto Star, for a story on Canada's booming asbestos market.
Special report: Retirement Lost
Columns: Patrick Lagace, La Presse, Montreal; Andre Picard, the Globe and Mail; Graham Thomson, Edmonton Journal
Investigations: David Bruser, Toronto Star, for an investigation into the disturbing plight of Canadian soldiers returning from service in Afghanistan; Steve Buist, the Hamilton Spectator, for a story about people whose lives were ruined by government-sanctioned gambling; Ariane Lacoursiere of La Presse in Montreal went underground to reveal sub-standard conditions and lack of staff training in privately-owned seniors' residences.
Arts and Entertainment: Susan Clairmont, the Hamilton Spectator, for columns about a debate over a urinal, a play based on a crime, and a photo exhibit of sex workers; Nick Patch, The Canadian Press, for columns on MuchMusic's anniversary, Randy Bachman's response to the death of Les Paul and musician Rob Mailhouse's trials with famous actors; Kate Wallace, New Brunswick Telegraph-Journal, for a profile of Saint John revered artist Fred Ross.
Sports: Steve Buist of the Hamilton Spectator for story on former NHL goalie Dave Dryden's charity work in the Third World; Isabelle Hachey of La Presse in Montreal for a story on a midget hockey team from a remote village in northern Quebec; Marty Klinkenberg of the New Brunswick Telegraph-Journal for an article on the championship comeback of the Bathurst high school basketball team after a van crash had killed most of the team's members a year earlier.
Feature Photography: Rachelle Labrecque, the Sault Ste. Marie Star, for a photo of a tiny six-year-old child with primordial dwarfism and her mother; Carlos Osorio, Toronto Star, for a picture of a parade of carved and lit pumpkins at a community event; Bruno Schlumberger, Ottawa Citizen, for a photo of a homeless man hunkering down as snow piles up around him
International Reporting: Michelle Shephard of the Toronto Star for stories on Yemen as a terrorist breeding ground; Graeme Smith of the Globe and Mail for stories of drug- and arms-fuelled corruption in the Afghan government; Geoffrey York, the Globe and Mail, on the abduction and ransoming of two Canadian diplomats.
Editorials: Sean Fine, the Globe and Mail; Lawrie McFarlane, Victoria Times Colonist; Adam Radwanski, the Globe and Mail.
Editorial Cartooning: Brian Gable, the Globe and Mail; Malcolm Mayes, Edmonton Journal; Terry Mosher (Aislin), the Gazette, Montreal.
Long Features: Carolyn Abraham, the Globe and Mail for a compelling report on geroscience, prolonging the human lifespan; Team Entry, La Presse, Montreal, for an evocative look at the global food crisis; Michele Ouimet, La Presse, Montreal, for a disturbing examination of a monstrous crime.
News Photography: Carlos Osorio, Toronto Star, for a photo of loved ones mourning the body of one of three Polish men who drowned in the Lake Muskoka region; Louie Palu, ZUMA Press/Toronto Star, for a shot of a Canadian medic gently closing the eyes of a young Afghan man who died in a gunfight; Steve Russell, Toronto Star, for a photo of a night time brawl outside a Toronto nightclub.
Breaking News: Dawn Walton, Les Perreaux and Josh Wingrove, the Globe and Mail, for their coverage of a couple's romantic ski trip turned into tragedy in the B.C. interior; Team Entry from the London Free Press for a series of stories about the abduction and killing of eight-year-old Tori Stafford of Woodstock; Kenyon Wallace of the Toronto Star for his reporting of a crash of a helicopter off the coast of Newfoundland and the loss of 17 lives.
Presentation: Genevieve Biloski, National Post; Jason Chiu and David Pratt, the Globe and Mail; David Woodside, the Globe and Mail
Jason Chiu and David Pratt's nominated page design:

