Montreal fire captain who was devoted to his profession was probably overwhelmed by an unexpected 'flashover'
? It was an unfortunate twist of fate that found a firefighter battling a blaze in the wrong place at the wrong time. A captain at Fire Station 14, Marcel Marleau hadn't originally been scheduled for duty last month when a fire broke out at an apartment building in the city's north end. But when a co-worker requested a change of shift, Mr. Marleau readily obliged. Such was the bitter irony that preceded the death of the 28-year veteran of the Montreal fire department.
Mr. Marleau was an undeniable presence at the fire hall. A hulking individual, he was 6 foot 2 and broad shouldered, yet possessed an easy laugh and happy-go-lucky nature.
Claude Forest, the Montreal Fire Department chaplain said that Capt. Marleau's heart was that of a firefighter. "He had the heart of a child, full of spontaneity and joy. He liked to tease. He had a father's heart and, of course, he had the heart of a husband."
The 47-year-old Mr. Marleau was "a maniac for hockey and baseball," his brother, Robert Marleau, recalled. "He loved music -- especially jazz. The only setback he had in his life was attempting to play the trombone."
The fire captain also liked to cook, said his brother. It was an expertise he honed at the firehouse. "You'd arrive at his home and the table would be set for three but he would inevitably prepare spaghetti for 20."
Mr. Marleau, who enlisted with the force in 1978, had been decorated on several occasions for bravery. On April 7, 1992, he was credited with risking his life to save several occupants of senior's home. A fire had engulfed the building and claimed seven lives. Described by fellow firefighters as a man who was devoted to his work, Mr. Marleau had been a fire captain since 2000 and was constantly seeking new ways to improve conditions for firefighters.
It was in the wee hours on a freezing Saturday morning last month when the firefighters from Precinct 14 were summoned to a Montreal apartment building after residents awoke to the smell of smoke. Mr. Marleau's crew raced to the scene but could see no sign of smoke. Punching their way inside, the firefighters found only minor flames and one smouldering sofa. Spreading out through the three-storey structure, the crew began an apartment-by-apartment search for residents.
Fernando Serrano, who lives nearby, observed the progress of the firefighters. At first, he thought the blaze was small and easily contained but suddenly, without warning, a large fire erupted. "I was shocked to see so many flames shooting out of the building."
A woman who escaped by leaping from her apartment told reporters that she knew that something was terribly wrong when she saw firefighters running out of the building hollering and yelling that their captain was trapped inside.
Mr. Marleau had become separated from his men during the search for residents and was surrounded by a sudden "flashover." Technically known as a thermal radiation feedback, a flashover is caused by an accumulation of increasing heat and gases. They can occur when the ceiling and inner walls, and the combustible material contained within them, absorb so much energy that they ignite in an explosive burst of flames when the gas reaches a specific temperature.
"A flashover comes at you like a speeding train," explained James Ross, the chief of operations at the Montreal fire department. In the space of just a few seconds, firefighters can find themselves surrounded by an inferno.
Officials believe Mr. Marleau was inspecting a series of rooms. Because there was no heavy smoke, he was probably caught off guard by the powerful rush of the flashover.
Firefighters ran inside in a desperate attempt to save him, only to be met by an impenetrable wall of flames. Mr. Marleau was trapped by the flames and fire chief Serge Tremblay said firefighters were unable to reach him, despite several attempts Suddenly, what had been a routine low-alert fire was a five-alarm inferno. Knowing that their captain had probably perished, the crew pressed on with the evacuation of the building and helped the residents escape. All told, they rescued about 30 residents. Another firefighter suffered second-degree burns to his face.
At the funeral, Claude Forest described fire as a cruel adversary. "Our sworn enemy is the Beast," he said at a funeral mass for Mr. Marleau. "It's vicious, treacherous and deceitful. You may think you've beaten it. But it's just feigning sleep until, suddenly, it bites.
"On Jan. 21, the Beast's bite was fatal."
The cause of the fire remains unknown and authorities are continuing their investigation.
Marcel Marleau was born
in Montreal on Aug. 21, 1958.
He died in a Montreal fire on
Jan. 21, 2006. He was 47.
He is survived by his wife,
Chantelle, and their two
children, Patrick and Philippe.

