Winter in the West Island is a time when nature and leisure activities can dovetail beautifully.
Robert Prairie, a patrol leader at Morgan Arboretum( https://www.mcgill.ca/morganarboretum/ ), heads a team of volunteers that help to ensure a safe and fun experience for the many individuals and families who enjoy recreational destinations in Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue.
Some of Prairie's most special memories while skiing the 26 kilometres of trails at the arboretum are related to the birds that inhabit the 245-hectare forest reserve.
"Sometimes I hear the resident great horned owl calling, and this is very special," he said.
Prairie has seen barred owls, snowy owls and red-shouldered hawks. More than 180 species have been observed there, and about 100 species breed at the arboretum.
Two of the eight trails open in the winter are mixed-use. Part of the role of the ski and snowshoe patrol team is to make sure that the rules in place for dogs are respected - creating one of the few dog-friendly places where owners and their dogs can walk, ski and snowshoe together.
There are also trails for more specific uses. Two trails are for walking and snowshoeing only, and there is a 4.4-km trail that is only for snowshoers.
An avid outdoors person, Prairie encourages people to think about snowshoeing as a good winter alternative to cross-country skiing.
"The nice thing about it is that sometimes the conditions aren't great for skiing," he said, "and even more than skiing, snowshoeing can be a great way to stay warm outdoors."
For those who want a classic cross-country ski trail, there is a 5.8-km loop, and after Prairie brought the suggestion to the arboretum, a 4-km skate-skiing trail was opened.
"The movement in skate-skiing is totally different. It is faster and a very good cardio activity," said Prairie.
Other activities at the arboretum include the coming Winterfest in February as well as a Full Moon Ski Event with date and time to be announced depending on weather and trail conditions.
"Last year, the moonlight ski event was a wonderful night with beginner, intermediate and advanced groups enjoying a night ski and hot chocolate afterward," said Prairie.
Open everyday from sunrise to sundown, day passes are available at the gatehouse from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. You can rent cross-country equipment and snowshoes at nearby John Abbott College. For more information, call 514-457-2737.
Also popular during the winter is Cap St-Jacques Nature Park( https://parcs-nature.com/public/en/cap-saint-jacques ) in Pierrefonds. On Jan. 11 from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., there will be a free event to introduce the park's winter activities to the public. In the evening, the trails will be open from 6:30 to 9:30, along with the sugar shack so people can warm up, enjoy some pea soup or pancakes and have a warm drink around an outdoor fire.
In addition to the four cross-country ski loops at Cap St-Jacques, there is a 5-km snowshoe trail, and there is onsite rental of cross-country ski equipment, snowshoes, luges, sleds, sliding mats, and baby gliders.
Among the many activities throughout the winter there will be events on Saturday nights, including an introduction to Cani-cross on Feb. 1, where you can try skiing with your dog; a Valentine's Day trails night with festive treats; an outdoor fire on Feb. 15 and on Feb. 29, there will be a stargazing evening with Pierre Paquette from Astronomie-Québec( http://astronomie.quebec/ ).
Information and registration is required for all events and is available at 514 280-6871 or on the city of Montreal's Cap St-Jacques webpage( https://parcs-nature.com/public/en/cap-saint-jacques ).
Related
Look for a little winter fun? Check out activities at West Island nature parks( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/look-for-a-little-winter-fun-check-out-activities-at-west-island-nature-parks )
Where to go for some of the best tobogganing in Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/where-to-go-for-the-best-tobogganing-in-montreal )
Watch: West Island residents welcome the Grand parc de l'Ouest plan( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-west-island-residents-welcome-the-grand-parc-de-louest-plan )
In Our Own Backyard: Cap St. Jacques( https://montrealgazette.com/news/world/in-our-own-backyard-cap-st-jacques )
In Our Own Backyard: Arboretum offers cool summer walk( https://montrealgazette.com/news/world/in-our-own-backyard-arboretum-offers-cool-summer-walk )

