With legions of Montrealers forced to walk in the streets for days rather than risk icy sidewalks, a spike in ambulance calls for falls, a public mutiny from one borough mayor and a public apology from the city's snow-clearing chief, it has been a rough week on the snow and ice front for the newly elected administration of Mayor Valérie Plante.
The day after freezing rain coated the city in ice last Tuesday, the city of Montreal opted not to call for an operation to clear snow because a thaw had been predicted for the weekend followed by more snow. When the thaw failed to materialize, Montrealers were sentenced to more days of ice-covered sidewalks and parking lots. Many ended up in hospitals.
Calling it "unrealistic" to expect snow to thaw in January, the mayor of the borough of Anjou, population 46,000, ordered snow-clearing operations to start mid-week. By Friday, the snow and ice had been cleared in his borough, Luis Miranda said. He told the central city it should be doing the same thing since Tuesday, he said.
"I took a decision based on the security of my constituents," Miranda said. "We couldn't wait like they did. Older-age people couldn't leave their homes since last week. We cannot condemn people to that."
The city of Montreal sent Miranda a disciplinary letter, and it has been intimated legal or financial repercussions could be leveled against the borough for defying city directives. Miranda said that message was repeated by Jean-François Parenteau, Montreal's executive committee member responsible for citizens services, and the mayor of Verdun.
"Listen, if I have to do it again I will," Miranda said. "For me, the law states I'm responsible for the security of my constituents."
Had the snow melted, it would have left massive lakes on each street corner, where snow-clogged drains would be unable to take the flow, Miranda said.
"I've been doing this for 28 years, maybe they should listen to me. ... He (Parenteau) didn't do his job properly. I don't think he's the man for the situation. I have a very low opinion of that man."
Miranda also criticized Parenteau for leaving his municipal political party, formerly known as the Équipe Coderre Pour Montréal, to sit as an independent so he could have a seat on the city's executive committee, now ruled by Projet Montréal.
On the weekend, Parenteau sent a public apology on Twitter.
"The thaw was not as large as expected and the snowfall predicted for Monday is no longer forecast," he wrote. "In retrospect, we should have ordered (snow removal) before. It was a bad choice on my part and I apologize."
Déneigement: Un chargement est décrété pour demain 19h00. Le redoux n'est pas aussi grand et l'accumulation prévu lundi n'est plus au rendez-vous. À postériori nous aurions pu décréter avant. Ce fut un mauvais choix de ma part et je m'en excuse! #polmtl( https://twitter.com/hashtag/polmtl?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw ) pic.twitter.com/lOIeK521ZW( https://t.co/lOIeK521ZW )
- J-F Parenteau (@JFParenteau) January 27, 2018( https://twitter.com/JFParenteau/status/957377134493884417?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
Urgences Santé confirmed it had between 30 and 40 calls last weekend related to falls, about four times the regular number. Although the causes of falls are not logged by ambulance drivers, much of the surge was linked to the ice, spokesperson Stéfan Overhoff said. Icy and snowy conditions also affect response times for paramedics who must navigate roadways and slippery sidewalks and staircases, often carrying stretchers.
Snow clearing began Sunday evening at 7. Instead of clearing snow earlier in the week, the city opted to spread more abrasives on sidewalks, Parenteau said, but acknowledged it dropped the ball when it came to parking lots.
Each city-wide snow-clearing operation costs roughly $15 million to $20 million, but Parenteau dismissed accusations his decision was financially motivated.
"It's never a question of budget. Snow will always fall in Montreal. We will adapt budget as necessary. It's never a question of the security of Montrealers."
With climate change bringing an increased rate of freeze-thaw cycles, the administration will make adjustments to tackle rapid freezes, Parenteau said, perhaps by splitting operations in boroughs so more territory can be covered more quickly. He chastised Miranda for starting operations ahead of the other boroughs, saying the city's snow-clearing strategy( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-promises-new-snow-clearing-strategy-by-spring ) calls for all boroughs to share services equitably in the interest of fairness.
The mayor of Anjou said he wasn't interested in downgrading services to his constituents.
"So, let's give everyone lousy services?" he asked. "Let's all wear a shoe with a hole. ... The same week we're raising taxes 3.8 per cent, and we're giving lousy services? It's bad."
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( http://twitter.com/renebruemmer )
Related
Josh Freed: Six reasons Montreal should install heated sidewalks( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/josh-freed-six-reasons-montreal-should-install-heated-sidewalks )
Montreal ices plan to heat Ste-Catherine St. sidewalks( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-ices-plan-to-heat-ste-catherine-st-sidewalks )
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette

