Record-setting temperatures are expected in Ontario on Monday, after a sweltering weekend caused the city of Toronto to issue an extreme-heat alert.
Record-setting temperatures are expected in Ontario on Monday, after a sweltering weekend caused the city of Toronto to issue an extreme-heat alert.
Dr. David McKeown, Toronto's Medical Officer of Health, extended an extreme-heat alert on Monday, warning city residents that the smog and humidity could be a health hazard for those with asthma or other respiratory ailments.
Environment Canada is forecasting a high of 35 degrees in the hottest regions, which extend from Windsor through Southwestern Ontario, all the way to Montreal.
Temperatures are expected to rise to a high of 32 degrees in Ottawa and 33 in Montreal.
Windsor and Toronto are expecting the highest temperatures at 35 degrees, challenging Toronto's 2002 record high of 34.4 degrees. Despite the extreme temperatures of the past few days, Toronto has had only four heat alerts this year. Last year there were a total of 14 heat alerts.
The Ontario Ministry of the Environment said smog levels are high because of hot and dirty air coming into the province from the United States, and pollutants from local industries and cars.
A spokeswoman from the Canadian Red Cross warned that it is not always evident that someone is suffering from the heat. People are advised to keep a close watch for symptoms such as dizziness, tiredness, headache and heat rash.
The Red Cross also advises to take the time to check on the elderly, children and those who have been ill, especially after a 97-year-old woman was found locked inside a black SUV in a Burlington mall parking lot for an hour on Saturday. The woman was treated for dehydration after passersby found her and called police. Temperatures soared above 30 degree outside, but the temperature was closer to 50 degrees inside the vehicle when she was found. She was locked in the SUV while her daughter and granddaughter went shopping.
Health officials are advising people to take the following measures in this hot weather:
1. Keep hydrated by drinking lots of water and natural juices
2. Avoid even moderate physical activity
3. Avoid going out in the sun. If you do, wear a hat
4. Stay in cool places with air conditioning, such as shopping malls or libraries
5. Take periodic baths or showers if no air conditioning is available

