QUEBEC - Victims, lawyers and opposition politicians have teamed up to pressure the Couillard government to abolish the statute of limitations on allegations of sexual assault.
Arguing it's a question of dignity and humanity, the group said the fact Quebec is just about the only province still imposing a time limit for victims to launch such cases is a "disgrace."
While 11 provinces and territories have abolished their limits, Quebec's Civil Code has a 30-year limit, increased from three years in 2013.
Prince Edward Island still has a statute in place and it is for three years. Most of the provinces have also made such recourse retroactive, the group noted at a Quebec City news conference.
The group said they want action before the current legislature is dissolved June 12 as Quebec heads into a provincial election on Oct. 1.
"Why does the statute need to be abolished?" asked lawyer Alain Arsenault. "To allow the victims to heal."
"It's not the amount (of compensation) that matters the most. It's this recognition (that they are victims)."
Arsenault, who has acted on behalf of many victims in legal pursuits against religious orders, had statistics to support the assertion that many cases never get dealt with because time runs out.
He said on average one woman in three is a victim of assault in her lifetime as is one man in six. That represents about 25 per cent of the population or 2.1 million people.
But only one in 10 victims ever comes forward and that can take a very long time as the victim wrestles with all the emotions that follow such assaults before confiding in anyone.
In the recent class action suit against the Congrégation Ste-Croix( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/a-long-and-tortuous-road-catholic-brothers-guilty-plea-brings-relief-for-victim-but-not-closure ), the time between the assaults and the launching of the case was about 43 years which means many victims and potential criminals were not dealt with under the 30-year rule.
The idea of abolishing the statute is not entirely new. In a report published last year, Quebec's ombudsman's office also urged( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/ombudsman-backs-call-to- end -time-limits-in-sexual-assault-cases )the government to abolish it( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/ombudsman-backs-call-to- end -time-limits-in-sexual-assault-cases ).
Nothing has happened with Arsenault speculating one reason the government has not acted is because it fears a flood of new cases.
"Maybe the real reason is a lobby by the religious institutions and the possibility that the government itself is found to be responsible as an employer of these institutions," Arsenault said.
Sébastien Richard, spokesperson for the coalition pressuring Quebec to act, estimates that based on assault statistics, abolishing the statute could spark between 10,000 and 20,000 new cases.
But Wednesday the focus was on pressuring the government.
"The imposing of a statute of limitations for victims of sexual assault represents a disgrace for Quebec," said Marc Bellemare, another lawyer (who is also a former Liberal cabinet minister) involved in such cases.
"There is no reason for a limit. I ask the question: Who is the government protecting, who does it want to protect?"
"For us, it's a question of humanity, a question of dignity," added Véronique Hivon, deputy-leader of the Parti Québécois in announcing her party is part of the coalition.
Representatives of the Coalition Avenir Québec and the Québec solidaire were also on hand.
But late Wednesday, a spokesperson for Quebec Justice Minister Stéphanie Vallée indicated the government sees no need to change the rules and said the group is creating confusion.
There is, in fact, no statute of limitations on criminal cases, the official said adding the Criminal Code is a federal responsibility.
Comparing Quebec to the other provinces is not fair because the other provinces do not have a civil code. If you compare Quebec to other countries with a civil code, such as France or Belgium, Quebec's statute of limitations is actually more generous.
And it was the PQ itself which proposed the 30-year limit when the code was modified in 2013, the official said.
The statute of limitations under the Civil Code also kicks in the moment the person realizes they were victims of assault, not the date of the act which means there is more time than the 30-year limit.
That means a person who is a victim at age 15 but not does not realize it constituted assault until age 40 during therapy or counselling would be able to press a case, the official said.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/philipauthier( https://twitter.com/PhilipAuthier )
CREDIT: Philip Authier, Montreal Gazette

