Pierrefonds-Roxboro Mayor Jim Beis says Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante shouldn't be telling anyone how to go about snow removal operations.
Beis said his suburban borough puts the city centre to shame when it comes to snow clearing.
"Well, (Plante) can send her team to the West Island and we'll show them how to do it. You can quote that because it's ridiculous."
Beis was reacting to a letter Plante( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-raps-boroughs-knuckles-on-snow-removal ) sent out to Montreal's 19 borough mayors last week, calling upon them to do a better job of clearing away the white stuff.
City officials came under criticism after a frigid January blizzard, combined with freezing rain, left city streets and sidewalks caked in ice.
Beis, who called the state of icy downtown streets a "war zone," bristled at Plante's letter.
"It's an insult we would receive something like this when they're only trying to cover up their own misfortunes in the city centre," Beis said.
Plante's letter told the borough mayors said she wouldn't accept inadequate results.
"I'm counting on you to pay particular attention to operations in your respective boroughs. Over the next few days, I want every one of you to be able to show your satisfaction in the work done," Plante wrote. "My expectations are very high and I will not accept, under any pretext, inadequate execution, because the population of Montreal expects, and has a right to expect, high quality services without fail on the entire territory."
Plante later told reporters that she wanted to achieve the same snow-clearing standards in all parts of the city. "It's not about targeting and saying this one is good, this one is bad," she said.
Beis called the mayor's letter "strictly a PR move" to deflect criticism of treacherous road and sidewalk conditions in the city centre.
"We could give them lessons," he added. "Unfortunately the problem is they have no communication with us. They don't reach out.
"What they need to do is get in their car and drive around and see some of their neighbours before they throw out some orders like this.
"It's not only us, it's also the rest of the West Island. As I said on Facebook, the West Island cities can also be used as models because we get it right."
In 2015, Montreal's City Council, then under Mayor Denis Coderre, adopted a snow removal policy that standardized snow removal practices across its territory. Under the policy, snow loading operations are to commence at the same time in all 19 boroughs. The policy also sets out standards on snow clearance, spreading abrasives and snow loading.
Once the signal is given by the city centre to begin operations, ultimately the boroughs are responsible for removing snow and spreading abrasives on streets and sidewalks.
Beis admitted snow removal and de-icing by city crews can be difficult under extreme weather conditions.
"It's not always perfect because of the weather, but we certainly do a better job than some of our counterparts in the centre city. They can spew all kinds of nonsense by saying they have cars and (street) parking and whatever they want. But sidewalks don't have cars."
Beis said he was appalled by the messy road conditions while visiting a friend at Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital in the east end two weekends ago.
"I have to tell you it was a horror story over there. You couldn't even walk on the sidewalks and you couldn't park anywhere, and this is near a hospital.
"Downtown is the same thing, and neighbouring boroughs are the same thing."
Beis said these treacherous road conditions would be unacceptable to residents of Pierrefonds and Roxboro.
"If I had this in my community, I'd tell you I'd be out tomorrow.
"Like I've said many times, it's not perfect out here, but we know the recipe of what has to get done."
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
Related
Plante in 'panic mode' over poor snow-clearing, opposition says( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-raps-boroughs-knuckles-on-snow-removal )
Beis defends drive-thru book return at new Pierrefonds library( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/beis-defends-drive-thru-book-return-at-new-pierrefonds-library )
Car-free REM station? Montreal city hall out of touch with West Island: Beis( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/beis-says-plantes-projet-montreal-out-of-touch-with-west-island )
How the little borough of Anjou buried the big snowy city of Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/how-the-little-borough-of-anjou-buried-the-big-snowy-city-of-montreal )

