Off-Island kids have a new place to go when it's pouring rain, freezing cold or too hot to comfortably play outside, with the opening of a new, free, indoor playground in Pincourt.
The municipally run indoor play structure was officially opened last Thursday, and is installed within the Faubourg de l'Île shopping centre, at 101 Cardinal-Léger Blvd.
On Saturday afternoon, over a dozen children were playing happily in the structure, while their parents stood nearby or perched on benches nearby.
While the playground is designed for children between the ages of five and 12, Ashley Charlebois said her almost three-year-old was enjoying climbing, crawling and sliding through the circuit with the help of an older six-year-old buddy.
Charlebois said she had come from Vaudreuil with another friend to try out the play structure. She said she'd likely bring her son back again another day.
"It adds something to the mall, and it gives us something to do on a rainy day," she said.
Ilyssa Schaffer said she appreciated that, unlike the larger indoor play centres, it was easy to keep her six-year-old in sight.
"I like that it's small enough that you can keep track. Sometimes in the bigger ones, it's hard to keep track of where the kids are," said Schaffer.
Five year old Garrett climbs through an obstacle in the Pincourt Indoor Municipal Park in Pincourt, Friday June 29, 2018.
According to Pincourt assistant general manager Etienne Bergevin Byette, the idea to create an indoor playground emerged from the town's social development policy, which aims to improve quality of life for citizens.
"We noticed an inside playground was missing. In winter, kids can't always use the outside areas," he said.
The play structure is located in the Faubourg de l'Île shopping centre, between Canadian Tire and Hart. An agreement with the mall owners has allowed the town to use space within the mall at no cost, he said. Bergevin Byette said the cost of the playground was just under $100,000.
"We already had the staff, so that is not a new cost. The only new cost to the city was the structure itself," said Bergevin Byette. "We are lucky to have the mall in our area and to have them as a partner. Not all municipalities have a space like that this that they can use in this way."
The indoor playground is open Monday to Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m., Thursday and Friday from noon to 9 p.m. and weekends from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Five-year-old Garrett swings on a suspended ball in the Pincourt Indoor Municipal Park.
CREDIT: Steve Faguy, Montreal Gazette

