Hélicoptère ??? out of ???? $$-$$$
Address: 4255 Ontario St. E.
Phone: 514-543-4255
Website: helicopteremtl.com( http://helicopteremtl.com/ )
Open: Wed.-Sat. 5:30 to 11 p.m.; Sun. 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Wheelchair access: No
Licensed: Yes
Reservations: Essential
Cards: All major
Vegetarian-friendly: Yes
Parking: On surrounding streets
Price range: Small plates $6-$21; desserts $9-$11.
When dining out, there may come a moment when the meal evolves from good to not so good, or even dismal. On the flip side, things can also go from good to very good, or even sublime. During some 20 years of restaurant reviewing, that "this isn't just good, it's freakin' great!" moment has happened to me maybe a handful of times, when you just know you're in the midst of people who really, really know how to cook. It's not simply about proper seasoning, beautiful plating, inventive flavour combinations or contrasting textures and temperatures. It's about all of those factors scoring in unison - a perfect storm of gastronomic excellence. Lucky for me, it happened just last week, in Hochelaga-Maisonneuve, at a restaurant called Hélicoptère. Quel winner!
Hélicoptère is run by chef David Ollu, pastry chef Mélodie Perez-Mousseau (presently on maternity leave) and sommelier Youri Bussières Fournel, a threesome who last worked at one of the city's top restaurants, Bouillon Bilk. Under chef François Nadon, the style of cuisine at Bouillon Bilk is chic and precise, with exquisite plate presentations, an emphasis on seasonality and the use of local ingredients. Hélicoptère shares two of those three attributes - the plate presentations, though lovely, are more relaxed.
Pastry chef Natacha Lehmann and co-owners Youri Bussieres Fournel, centre, and David Ollu with Helicoptere's kitchen and wait staff: the east-end restaurant elevates the small-plates format.
The decor is casual as well, with its emerald-green walls, exposed brick, potted plants and hardwood floors. There's a small bar on the west side of the room and an intricate lighting fixture above it all that frames the space quite brilliantly. The buzz of discovery is in the air, and the sound levels, though elevated, are in no way overwhelming. As for the service, our waitress was sharp, fluently bilingual and as friendly as can be.
The menu takes the oh so popular small-plates format, and the wine list is filled with well-priced private imports, dominated by organic, biodynamic and natural wines. There are fun cocktails on offer, as well as a selection of craft beers. Thing is, this format is favoured by so many restaurants now that I feared Hélicoptère would be just more of the same. While the trend toward small plates is obviously appealing to chefs, trendy cooking goes against creativity. (Not that I want chefs to serve food in, say, flower pots, but it's always nice to see cooks do things differently.) But what makes Hélicoptère stand out is what's on those plates - and at prices that are significantly lower than what you'd find farther west.
Chicken liver mousse is served atop financier cakes at Helicoptere.
We ordered a bunch of dishes to start. The first to hit the table, a chicken liver mousse served atop financier cakes, was one of the best. Financiers are little almond cakes flavoured with brown butter, and these babies were topped with a luscious mousse de foie de volaille and scattered with blueberries and chopped pistachios. You'd think the base would be too sweet for the topping, but chicken liver has a nice sweetness to it that worked well with the moist cake.
Then came a dish of calamari, served with cucumber ribbons, pickles and a sort of thinned-out salsa verde. But the kitchen didn't stop there, as the added mint, chili and fried shallots provided a Southeast Asian flavour boost. Nice.
I can't think of a dish I enjoyed recently that tasted more of summer than Hélicoptère's heirloom tomato salad with baby basil, kombucha and a feta cream. Sprinkled with sumac, every bite of tomato tasted of perfectly ripe fruit, yet the texture remained firm. And the spice added such an original touch.
Helicoptere's beef tartare packs a punch.
Speaking of original, the beef tartare was just that, made with slices of green and yellow beans, a good hit of lemon and just enough chili to make your lips tingle. When the serving was finished, I scooped up three little cubes of remaining meat that, though small, still packed a flavour punch.
The next wave of dishes was just as strong. Vegetables are given big play on Hélicoptère's menu, and a dish of pattypan squash served over herbed yogurt, sprinkled with Berbère spices and garnished with tiny marigolds was another hit. Granted, it wasn't the most compelling dish, but it was lapped up in seconds, as was the plate featuring quail with leek, onions and harissa. Just imagine succulent morsels of quail meat served alongside rings of poached leek over a smear of velvety hummus swirled with harissa. This combination was so irresistible that my dining companion requested another small portion of the hummus and harissa, which we scooped up on nuggets of their dense homemade pain au levain. Yes!
Helicoptere's quail is served alongside poached leek over a smear of hummus swirled with harissa.
The last round of savoury dishes carried on the deliciousness, starting with a seared arctic char filet served with beets, dill and a handful of chopped pistachios (the nut of choice these days). What a perfect mix of flavours and textures. The same could be said for the cavatelli. Topped with toasted bread crumbs and seared maitake mushrooms, this glorious mix of al-dente pasta, fresh corn, clams and lemon should not be missed. By now we had enjoyed more than a half-dozen dishes, but I couldn't stop myself from polishing off this bowl of loveliness.
Cavatelli with maitake mushrooms, corn, clams and lemon is a must at Helicoptere.
One of the only dishes that didn't wow was the tortellini with a bacon stuffing, served in a bacon stock with shiitake, scallions and sesame. As much as I liked the tortellini, I felt the bacon flavour was too faint, making this sort of gussied-up "pasta in brodo" surprisingly subdued.
After such a superb meal, I was also a little disappointed by the desserts. Of the four on offer, my favourite was the honeydew melon with meringue, lime, honey and a granité made from shiso leaf, mostly because of the potent melon cubes and that original, very "green"-tasting granité. The other three - strawberry shortcake with white chocolate cream, an ice cream sandwich with rhubarb, caramel and currants, and an almond cake with peach and white chocolate - were good, not great, lacking the vibrancy of the savoury menu.
Helicoptere's desserts include almond cake with peach and white chocolate.
I hate to end on a low note when discussing one of this summer's high points of dining, and I have no doubt that this team, which has been in business just over two months, can only improve. And I'm told they do brunch, where for $35 you receive a full menu. If you'd like something even more casual, try out their café, Hélico, right around the corner.
I sometimes get a little discouraged about the Montreal restaurant scene, in that the same names tend to be bandied around for years, with too few new stars on the horizon. But thanks to sharp cooking in restaurants like Hélicoptère, I feel the next generation is on the rise. And how great to see them doing their thing in the eastern part of the city, a bit far from the usual gourmet action. With food this good, Hélicoptère is a destination restaurant if ever there was one.
You can hear Lesley Chesterman on ICI Radio-Canada Première's Médium Large (95.1 FM) Tuesdays at 10 a.m., and on CHOM (97.7 FM) Wednesdays at 7:10 a.m.
criticsnotebook@gmail.com( mailto:criticsnotebook@gmail.com )
twitter.com/LesleyChestrman( http://twitter.com/LesleyChestrman )
Related
More from Lesley Chesterman( https://montrealgazette.com/author/lchesterman )
CREDIT: Lesley Chesterman, Special to Montreal Gazette

