Karen Cliffe will be the Coalition Avenir Québec (CAQ) candidate for the riding of Nelligan in next fall's provincial election.
While announcing Cliffe's candidacy on Monday, CAQ leader François Legault said West Islanders will now have an alternative to the Quebec Liberal party when they go to the polls in October.
"Karen, along with many citizens of the West Island of Montreal, is tired of being taken for granted by the Liberals," Legault said in a statement.
"The citizens want to talk about economic development, jobs, and health. They do not want to endlessly debate the sovereignty of Quebec.
"The CAQ project is inside of Canada," Legault added. "The citizens of the West Island of Montreal now have an alternative: the CAQ."
Cliffe will be tasked with trying to unseat Liberal incumbent Martin Coiteux in Nelligan, a riding that includes Kirkland, the borough of Île-Bizard-Ste-Geneviève as well as part of Pierrefonds-Roxboro.
Coiteux easily won the riding in 2014 with over 80 percent of the vote, compared to 9.47 per cent for CAQ runner-up Albert Bitton.
Aside from being the Minister for the Montreal region, Coiteux is also Minister of Public Security and Minister of Municipal Affairs in Premier Philippe Couillard's government.
Cliffe, an entrepreneur and marketing specialist, ran unsuccessfully for a seat on Kirkland's city council in last November's municipal election.
She said access to health care motivated her to become a candidate for the CAQ. She also criticized the provincial Liberals for its handling of last year's spring flood crisis.
"In the greater Montreal area, a large number of people are still waiting to be compensated by the Liberal government. In Pierrefonds, the memory of the floods is still present," Cliffe said in a statement.
"And what will happen this spring if more floods occur? The authorities must be ready to deal with this kind of emergency. The CAQ has mentioned it several times: it is necessary to facilitate the processing of the files of the victims, so that the families can undertake or finish the repairs of their house as soon as possible."
Cliffe also plans to "accompany the municipal authorities" for the construction of an urban boulevard linking Pierrefonds and Kirkland, between Highway 40 and Gouin Blvd.
"With the REM to be built in the next few years, we will need more fluid access to the new station that will be built," she said. "This is essential for the quality of life of the citizens of the area and I will work with the municipal authorities to build the urban boulevard."
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: John Meagher, Montreal Gazette

