Now that the heat wave( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/humidex-will-hit-near-40-c-as-montreals-heat-warning-extended ) has settled in over southwestern and central Quebec, residents sweltering their way through it are being reminded to stay hydrated and make time to spend in a cooler environment whenever possible.
But what are the errors to avoid during a heat wave? The Presse Canadienne asked that question to Dr. Pierre Gosselin, a climate and health adviser at the Institut national de santé publique du Québec, and here are six examples he provided of what NOT to do during a heat wave.
Don't consume very cold drinks. This isn't a good idea because the cold of the beverage can freeze up your sinuses, which is as unpleasant as being overly hot. While the idea is to cool off, super cold drinks are not a necessary part of the process. By all means stay by an air conditioner or a fan, and yes, remain hydrated, but cold beverages are not an essential way to do so.
Don't drink fruit juices. High in sugar content, the juices will not hydrate you the way water will. The sugar in fruit juices creates a need for extra water, which is self-defeating during a heat wave. In fact, make sure to consume some salt - either in your drink or food - while you're hydrating, which allows the body to balance its water intake.
Avoid alcohol. Moderate consumption of low-proof drinks like regular beers or wine is all right, but must be done in moderation. Avoid spirits, craft beers and high-proof wines. Increased alcohol intake provokes frequent urination and can act as a diuretic - which eliminates rather than increases hydration. It can also alter judgment and cause you to not observe the precautions needed during a heat wave.
Do not take a cold shower. Water temperature isn't as cold in summer as it is in winter and while you're perfectly free to let your shower head chill up as much as possible, a cool rather than frigid shower will inflict less of a shock on your system.
Do not engage in strenuous activity - at least not after sunrise or before sundown. Jogging in the heat is risky enough, but given the increased level of air pollution that attends the arrival of a heat wave, you're not doing your lungs any favours. The warning extends to all physical activity - exercise or physical labour - since high temperatures and high levels of activity can add up to dehydration and potentially fatal heat stroke.
Do not leave your drapes open. Once again, at least not after sunrise or before sundown. Open curtains during the day let in heat as well as sunlight. Also, don't operate appliances such as ovens, dishwashers and washing machines and dryers during a heat wave because they will add heat to an already over warm environment.
Related
Heat wave in Montreal to be followed by average summer: meteorologist( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-wave-in-montreal-to-be-followed-by-average-summer-meteorologist )
Embrace the heat wave at these Montreal swimming spots( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/embrace-the-heat-wave-at-these-montreal-swimming-spots )

