It has been a cool, wet spring in Montreal.
Hopefully, April showers will bring May flowers to a city coping without Stanley Cup playoff hockey or much sunshine.
If you thought April was wetter than usual, you were right.
About 102 millimetres of precipitation fell in Montreal in April, compared with the average of 68 millimetres.
But this April pales in comparison with last April, when about 160 millimetres of precipitation fell on Montreal, contributing to the great flood of 2017.
Things were much worse a year ago. In fact, on May 5 last year, Quebec called in the Canadian Army to help in flooded areas.
But Alexandre Parent, a meteorologist with Environment Canada, notes that April 1996 was even wetter, with 178 millimetres of precipitation recorded for Montreal.
Take Our Poll( http://polldaddy.com/poll/9992214 )
Parent said temperatures should slowly rise in May after being a few degrees below normal in April. But don't expect pitchers of beer and sangria to start appearing on sun-washed terraces just yet.
"There might be a few showers, even thunderstorms on Wednesday and Thursday," Parent said. "But the amount of rain for the Montreal area for the next five or six days, I would say between maybe 10 and 20 millimetres at the most. Unless we're really unlucky."
More rain means sump pumps could be working overtime in some areas.
"In some places, it's pretty bad now," Parent said. "The Beauce got over 100 millimetres of rain with the last two events of Thursday and Saturday. So it's not a surprise the Chaudière River is flooding right now. Plus, they had some snow left on the ground. When you have rain and snow, it's not a good mix.
"There is some surveillance north of Montreal on the Rivière des Mille Îles. Lake of Two Mountains as well. There is some minor flooding in Terrebonne."
But warmer weather is forecast for, ahem, sometime this summer.
"We'll be back to normal soon," Parent said. "The next few days we're slightly above, and then back to normal for the weekend."
Which means the winter coats can finally go in the closet.
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: John Meagher, Montreal Gazette

