The Montreal area's first serious taste of winter began at a little after midnight( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/it-starts-at-midnight-snowfall-warning-issued-for-montreal-area ) and by 7 a.m. had added close to seven centimetres of frustration to the morning rush hour.
While traffic on main thoroughfares in the city was moving somewhat slower than usual, slippery road conditions led the Montreal police department to warn motorists to adapt their driving habits( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang ) to the realities of winter and Société de transports de Montréal managed commuters' expectations by acknowledging that delays in bus service could be expected.
Snow removal crews were clearing main streets as a priority, although by 7:30 a.m. many sidewalks had yet to be plowed, including those in the downtown core.
By noon, Montreal police were reporting that while several traffic accidents appeared to be linked to weather conditions, none were serious and no injuries were reported.
However provincial police, while recording essentially the same situation on provincial highways, had to deal with a more spectacular incident Friday morning after a school bus carrying 30 elementary school children apparently lost control and flipped onto its side while negotiating a ramp leading off of northbound Highway 15 in St. Jérôme. While two children were taken to hospital as a precaution, there were released soon after.
The rest of the passengers were picked up by a second school bus and continued to their destination.
While police suspect weather and road conditions may have been factors in the incident, they intend to question the driver about the circumstances leading up to loss of control.
On Thursday night, the city of Montreal announced that it had 1,000 pieces of snow removal equipment ready to deal with the up to 15 centimetres of snow expected Friday. Officials noted that on average no more than 18 centimetres of snow falls during the month of November and urged Montrealers to use public transit Friday.
Related
Montreal winter-driving guide: How to avoid sliding, sliding ... bang!( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang )
Blizzard proof! A spadeful of tips for safe snow shovelling( https://montrealgazette.com/news/blizzard-proof-a-spadeful-of-tips-for-safe-snow-shovelling )

