Environment Canada has extended its heat warning until Sunday afternoon, but relief is in sight for the rest of the week.
A cool front will come in Sunday evening, dropping temperatures to a refreshing 17 degrees by 5 a.m., the national weather service is forecasting.
"Tomorrow, we're expecting lower temperatures, with much lower humidity levels," said Catherine Brabant, a meteorologist with Environment Canada.
Saturday's high of 32.8 - with a humidex of 43 - wave didn't break any records "but we came close," she said.
The record temperature of 33.3 for July 20 was set in 1991.
Sunday's temperature is expected to reach 29 degrees by 4 p.m., when the humidex will reach 37. But temperatures will start dropping by 8 p.m. There is a medium risk of thundershowers all day, dropping to a low risk in the evening.
While this weekend's heat wave( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-warning-issued-for-montreal-area-as-temperature-could-soar-to-45-c ) has been oppressive, it doesn't compare with last year's, which caused 66 deaths in July 2018( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sixty-six-people-died-during-montreals-2018-heat-wave ), Brabant said.
"It was pretty humid but the duration was not what we got last year," she said.
The length of a heat wave is the most important factor, since the effects of prolonged heat are cumulative( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-ready-for-heat-wave-plante ) and increase the longer it drags on, she said.
"The fourth day is going to be much worse in terms of the effects on people's bodies," she said.
That's why health authorities warn people to drink water frequently in extremely hot weather - not waiting until they feel thirsty - and to cool down at least once a day, either by taking a dip in a local pool or going into an air-conditioned environment, she noted.
The weekend weather cocktail also included thundershowers. Transports Québec closed two ramps on Highway 40 near Langelier Blvd. Sunday morning after heavy rain in east-end Montreal flooded part of the Métropolitain Expressway. The situation returned to normal within about an hour.
Starting Sunday night, "we'll be able to open the windows and get some relief," she said.
Monday's forecast calls for a high of 24, under mainly cloudy skies.
"The heat and humidity will build up slowly during the week," Brabant said.
The daily high will reach 29 by Friday and 30 by Sunday, staying around that level into the following week, she said.
"It will be slightly above normal, but not unusual," she said.
The average high for July 21, 22 and 23 is 26.6 and the average low is 15.8.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )

