Heat records are tumbling like dominoes across western Europe, as cities like Amsterdam, Brussels and Paris sizzle in temperatures over 40 C.
The climate crisis is making life unbearable - and even dangerous - on a continent where only about five per cent of citizens( https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2019/06/28/europes-record-heatwave-is-changing-stubborn-minds-about-value-air-conditioning/?fbclid=IwAR0l84zh2b12L42HcdKVuuFPU0dtNq8w5o5xnQauA3env6lFe8HhOzbPMN8&utm_term=.758dc0bd3bee ) have air conditioning.
The mercury in Montreal reached a comparatively pleasant 30 C this weekend. So far we've escaped the oven-like heat roasting Europe. Still, Montrealers can commiserate. Last July, stifling weather claimed 66 lives in a weeklong span( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sixty-six-people-died-during-montreals-2018-heat-wave ) - two thirds of them, according to Montreal's public health department, in heat islands, where paved surfaces and a lack of green space amplify the risk of scorching temperatures.
As Montreal and other cities around the world increasingly seek ways to mitigate the impact of extreme heat - which is only expected to intensify as climate change wreaks havoc - new research offers some valuable data about the importance of trees in this effort.
A Concordia University biology professor set out to quantify the cooling power of trees in an urban environment.
While doing her PhD in Madison, Wis., Carly Ziter used a bicycle-mounted unit to take temperature readings in different parts of the city with varying amounts of trees.
Until now, research has focused on the temperature variations between urban areas and forested zones beyond city limits. But Ziter wanted to see if there were fluctuations between inner-city neighbourhoods as well.
"We really wanted to know how temperature differs at the scale we go about our daily lives, so we went out and measured temperatures at these scales," she said. "We wanted to put some really specific measures to this instead of just saying, 'Wow, trees are great. They provide shade.' "
What she found is that temperatures can be up to 5 C cooler during the day and 2 C cooler at night in parts of the city where there is significant tree coverage, versus areas that are heavily paved. The most drastic differences were detected where the tree canopy reached a lush 40 per cent.
"Trees not only provide shade, they are also transpiring or giving off water vapour, so they act like little air conditioners," Ziter said.
Ziter's study, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America( https://www.pnas.org/content/116/15/7575 ), is just one of several recent findings about the role of trees in addressing the global climate crisis.
Research out of ETH Zurich using satellite imagery and on-the-ground data indicates that planting 1.2 trillion trees( https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/07/trees-reforestation-climate-change-crisis/?fbclid=IwAR1rLJ1rxpIHbM1BUwx_qvCHW1kdz5emaETlTAobocMtxrPUsIO18IcJw18 ) - and adding 1.6 billion hectares to the 2.8 billion hectares that already exist - could absorb two-thirds of the carbon emissions pumped into the atmosphere since the Industrial Revolution. The science suggests that massive reforestation efforts should be moved to the top of the priority list of actions needed to combat the climate emergency.
While 0.9 billion hectares of the land needed for this reforestation effort is available outside urban and agricultural areas, expanding the tree canopy in cities will also be crucial.
Yet biologists are only beginning to understand the particularities of urban trees compared to larger forests. Alain Paquette, a biology professor at the Université du Québec à Montréal, just received a federal grant to investigate the conditions under which urban trees grow best( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/researchers-take-stock-of-how-canadas-urban-forests-protect-our-health ) and what practices should be developed to keep them healthy and thriving.
Ziter hopes to contribute to this knowledge. But her research measuring how much trees cool their environment and how many are needed to make a difference already has profound policy implications for Montreal.
"It's really hard to achieve 40 per cent canopy in an urban environment," she said. "What this means is we're going to have to be a lot more creative about how we design cities and plant trees to get to these levels."
For Montreal, addressing the lack of greenery in boroughs like LaSalle, Park Ex and Hochelaga-Maisonneuve, where the most heat-related deaths were recorded in 2018, is crucial. But measures to protect old-growth trees from sickness or being cut down for development are equally essential.
"Tree planting is great, but we also have to ensure we are protecting the large, mature trees that we have," said Ziter. "If you cut down a tree, even if you replant it, it's going to take decades to get to where it was."
Trees alone won't spare cities the worst effects of climate change, Ziter said, so new technologies are also needed, like green or white roofs and road construction materials that lessen the heat-island effect.
But it's hard to beat the power of trees.
"We really have to start looking at trees as the valuable infrastructure that they are."
ahanes@postmedia.com( mailto:ahanes@postmedia.com )
Related
Hanes: Is the most effective climate-crisis solution in your backyard?( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/hanes-is-the-most-effective-climate-crisis-solution-in-your-backyard )
Hanes: To boost recycling, we must reduce our trash( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-recycling-glass-is-key-to-reducing-our-rubbish )
Hanes: Technoparc wetlands are worth saving( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-technoparc-wetlands-are-worth-saving )

