I woke up at 4:05 a.m. the other night and had an urgent anxious thought, typical of that hour.
Had I checked my Guardian newspaper subscription lately? It'd been about a year since I took a cheap intro offer of $40 and if I missed the expiry date it could rise to $80.
That soon reminded me I hadn't checked my landline phone bill recently, which could go up without notice, too.
That soon got my brain feverishly thinking: why do I need a landline anyway? Maybe I should cancel it, since everyone calls my cellphone?
But then again, I thought: what if there's an earthquake, or a forest fire, and the power goes out, so there's no way to contact anyone except by landline?
Or what if there's a nuclear war and - ohmigod, Trump is in charge of the button!
That's when I opened my eyes to check the clock again: 4:27 a.m. ... Aaaagh! Time to get out of bed and STOP THINKING.
These are the kind of spiralling thoughts I get when I'm sleepless in Montreal in the dead of night. I fret about endless small things that never cross my mind during the day, and my brain lights up like a pinball machine.
Did I lock the front door? Did I park the car on the right side? ... Did I remember to bring the car home? ... Hmm, what's that pimple on my arm, or is it a bump? God, it's a tumour!
In the late-night hours my brain is taken over by my low-IQ alter ego, Sludge the night fill-in. He can spend half an hour just wondering if it's garbage night.
But how can I shut him up? As any sleep hygienist will say, you've got to stop thinking by distracting your mind. But how?
I count sheep, running backwards. Or I count the number of passing cars. I've spent 30 minutes counting rotations of the overhead fan.
Sleepless friends also send me the hottest "deep sleep" meditation-style tapes. They feature sounds of waves, wind and wombs, while a guy with a hypnotic voice commands me to:
"Breathe i-i-n-n deeply ... through your nose, then o-o-ut through your mouth. With every breath your cares and worries drift away. ...
"Your mind is very quiet... nothing matters. Nothing matters ... nothing matters."
Easy for him to say. He's not worrying that he left his credit card in the gas pump.
I visualize scenes to make me drowsy too: I mentally bike up Mount Royal, recalling my last trip there: cycling past the monument, then the graceful big tree, then the gentle bend in the road, the park bench, the squirrels gathering nuts ... I'm getting sleepy now ... sleeeeepy ...
But hmmm, where are the mountain's usual drug pushers who haven't been there since the government took over their job? I wonder where they've gone? How they make a living? ... If they have famil- ... Oh geez, I'm waking up now. And did I remember to buy milk?
Some sleepless friends have their own late-night tricks. One listens to comedians on his headphones and swears laughing puts him right back to sleep. Others leave their bedrooms for an hour to do work, or just re-arrange the furniture. Again.
Donald Trump sends out 4:30 a.m. tweets when he can't sleep, which keeps the whole world awake the next night.
My best remedy is reading, but not page-turners. I need something interesting enough to read, but too dense to keep me awake. I have many Great Boring Books by my bedside. May I recommend:
"Finnegan's Wake," a James Joyce sleep classic with no obvious plot, just a stream-of-conscious, dream-like flow of words that perchance may make you dream.
Also excellent is The Oxford Dictionary, a slow read with no story at all, almost as though the author just threw a bunch of random words together in alphabetic order.
You'll learn some new words and along the way you may gradually enter a period of hebetude, somnolence, torpidity, insensibility and slumber.
Remember: the worst thing to do is look at the clock, which only makes you think: "Ohmigod, I've been up 47 minutes, I'll never get enough sleep" - which just gives you another thing to worry about.
The best thing to do is throw in the towel, give up on sleep entirely and lie in bed daydreaming till morning.
Next thing you know you'll be sleeping.
* * *
Dozens of you have written me complaining you can't find the Mount Royal consultation website to give your opinion on the road closing( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/josh-freed-make-your-voice-heard-on-the-future-of-mount-royal ). Here's the best link, just sent to me by the city's consultation bureau: http://ocpm.qc.ca/fr/consultation-publique/voies-dacces-au-parc-mont-royal/inscriptions( http://ocpm.qc.ca/fr/consultation-publique/voies-dacces-au-parc-mont-royal/inscriptions )
Scroll to the bottom of that page, where a French-only online form asks for your name, information and a "message optionelle."
You can send that message in French or English. Do it. The deadline is Nov. 30.
joshfreed49@gmail.com( mailto:joshfreed49@gmail.com )

