There's no way around it: commuter rail and freight traffic going from Candiac to Montreal passes through Mohawk territory.
Locals say the inconvenient truth of being relegated to a reserve on Montreal's South Shore is that the government has - for more than 150 years - expropriated land to make way for train tracks, a seaway, power lines and highways.
But activists in Kahnawake turned that to their advantage last weekend when they joined a national protest movement in support of the Wet'suwet'en pipeline protest in British Columbia. Mohawks erected a blockade on the Canadian Pacific rail line last week and, for the second consecutive day Tuesday, their action shut down commuter traffic linking the South Shore to Montreal.
The blockade is backed by Kahnawake's elected band council and its traditional longhouse elders.
"I understand this is frustrating for commuters, but we're fighting for their rights, too. We're fighting so they can live in a country with free people and clean water. We're fighting for life," said James Nolan, who stood watch over a fire next to the blockade.
The blockade is in solidarity with Wet'suwet'en land defenders( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/vancouver-port-blockade-prompts-injunction-arrests-on-monday-morning/wcm/2b053bab-9ae7-4c61-8dd4-5b3d1a0d3e47 ) and hereditary chiefs, who are fighting to stop construction of the Coastal GasLink pipeline project in northwest B.C. RCMP tactical officers began clearing them from the forest last week to enforce an injunction that would allow construction of the project to begin.
But that action was met with a nationwide resistance movement: paralyzing Via Rail traffic between Toronto and Montreal, shutting down the port at Prince Rupert and affecting commercial shipping in Halifax and Montreal.
And while Ontario police moved in Tuesday to disperse a Mohawk blockade near Belleville, Nolan says the Kahnawake structure is holding firm until the RCMP pulls out of Wet'suwet'en territory.
He says he was raised not only to believe in solidarity with other Indigenous Peoples but also to act on those beliefs. In 1990, when the military and police surrounded his sister community of Kanesatake, Nolan's father didn't give him a choice.
"He said, 'Well, boys, let's go.' I was 16, 17 years old and we were off to the checkpoints to hold down against the army," said Nolan, who was joined by his son James Jr. Tuesday.
"You're a teenager, you want to party and hang out with friends, but you're a part of something bigger. You have to stand up to the army, stand up for your people."
In Quebec City, politicians called for a peaceful resolution to the blockade.
"I invite government to be cautious (in its handling of the situation)," interim Liberal leader Pierre Arcand told reporters. "But one thing is clear: we can't tolerate illegal acts.
"But the negotiation route always remains the best route to take. I invite the parties to continue to discuss. There has to be discussion on this, but we can't accept that there be illegality."
Exo, the regional authority that oversees local commuter rail service, describes the duration of the service interruption as "indefinite"( https://exo.quebec/fr/etat-services/train/ligne-candiac ) and has provided shuttle buses to get customers from the South Shore to Montreal.
The protest in Montreal blocked the Canadian Pacific rail line and affected commuters using stations in Candiac, Delson, St-Constant and Ste-Catherine, as well as the LaSalle and du Canal stations in Montreal.
About 25,000 Via Rail passengers have been affected by blockades in Ontario and Quebec. All Montreal-Toronto and Toronto-Ottawa trains have been cancelled until end of day Thursday.
"The only way they're going to pay attention is if we hit them where it hurts: their economy," said Sedalia Kawennotas, a Mohawk elder. "If this is an inconvenience for commuters, think about us. We've been inconvenienced for 500 years. This isn't just for us: how will they feel if their grand children don't have clean drinking water?
"This isn't for us, it's for the generations we haven't seen yet."
Montreal-based Canadian National Railway Co. said Tuesday it will be forced to shut down "significant" parts of its Canadian network imminently unless the blockades on its rail lines are removed.
Hundreds of freight trains have been cancelled since the blockades - in Belleville, Ont. and in northern British Columbia - began five days ago, CN said. CN said it has secured court injunctions for both locations and is working with local police to enforce the orders.
A representative from Canadian Pacific said Tuesday the company is monitoring the situation and would not answer when asked if it sought an injunction to clear the Candiac-Montreal line.
For Nolan, who works in security, there was never a question as to whether he'd take time away from his job to watch over the blockade. Him and a tight-knit group of protesters are standing guard in shifts.
"Our job isn't to go to work and make money, it's to protect our brothers and sisters," Nolan said. "They can arrest some of us, but they can't arrest us all. You see what these pipelines do, they explode, they spill, they destroy. We can't allow that to happen."
Related
Wet'suwet'en pipeline protesters continue blocking Vancouver ports despite injunction( https://montrealgazette.com/news/canada/anti-pipeline-protesters-blocking-vancouver-ports-vow-to-ignore-injunction/wcm/0958daef-00a3-487b-a0bf-3a9faa2d9ae1 )
Wet'suwet'en protests from a physician's perspective( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/larry-barzelai-and-warren-bell-wetsuweten-protests-from-a-physicians-perspective/wcm/a1be4e93-7f04-498b-8029-0d2fce8fa516 )
A protester puts up a flag on train track crossing Kahnawake on Feb. 11, 2020.

