The hot weather in Ontario didn't break any records Monday, with Toronto temperatures hovering around 34 degrees in the late afternoon, before cooling down for the evening.
The hot weather in Ontario didn't break any records Monday, with Toronto temperatures hovering around 34 degrees in the late afternoon, before cooling down for the evening.
Environment Canada had forecasted a high of 35 degrees in the hottest regions, which extend from Windsor through Southwestern Ontario, all the way to Montreal.
Cities across Southwestern Ontario and the eastern United States braced for the heat, after a sweltering weekend caused the city of Toronto to issue an extreme-heat alert.
Dr. David McKeown, Toronto's Medical Officer of Health, extended an extreme-heat alert on Monday, warning residents of the city that the smog and humidity could be a health hazard for those with asthma or other respiratory ailments.
Temperatures rose to a high of 33 degrees in Ottawa, and 32 degrees in Montreal. Toronto had the highest temperature at 34 degrees, just shy of the city's 2002 record high of 34.4 degrees.
Despite the extreme temperatures of the past few days, Toronto has had only four heat alerts this year. Last year there were a total of 14 heat alerts.
"Last summer was relentless," said Environment Canada's senior climatologist, David Phillips. "[Southern Ontario]had seven to eight days in a row without a break from the hot weather ... but this summer hasn't been so bad."
The heat wave is expected to end Monday night, with showers and thunderstorms developing about midnight.
"That little bit of rain will scrub the air clean, and we won't be weezing and gasping like we have been the last two days," Mr. Phillips said. "Everyone's going to be a lot more comfortable."
The Ontario Ministry of the Environment said smog levels are high because of hot and dirty air coming into the province from the United States, and pollutants from local industries and cars.
High pressure has created a "heat pump" that continues to draw moist and warm air from the southern U.S. and the Gulf of Mexico.
"When that warm air is pumped this way, it becomes polluted as it travels over the Ohio Valley and into Southern Ontario," Mr. Phillips said. He said the high temperatures are not necessarily indicative of the effects of global warming.
"We can't see climate change simply by looking out the window," he said. "While it's no mystery that our weather seems to be warmer now, this is usually the warmest time of the year anyway. This is when everyone is complaining and the air conditioners are really humming. We can't look at one episode of weather and blame it on climate change. We have to look at trends over a long period of time."
South of the border, Americans are also roughing the heat with temperatures in the mid- to high-30s. The city of Philadelphia sent outreach workers to check on the homeless and elderly on Monday, and a "heatline" hot line was activated where nurses answered questions and gave advice about coping with the weather.
New York State issued an air quality health advisory because of ground-level ozone, a major component of smog that irritates the respiratory tract and eyes, and Illinois converted more than 130 office buildings into cooling centres, after a heat wave killed 700 people in Chicago in 1995.
A spokeswoman from the Canadian Red Cross warned that it is not always evident that someone is suffering from the heat. People are advised to keep a close watch for symptoms such as dizziness, tiredness, headache and heat rash.
The Red Cross also advises to take the time to check on the elderly, children and those who have been ill, especially after a 97-year-old woman was found locked inside a black SUV in a Burlington mall parking lot for an hour on Saturday. The woman was treated for dehydration after passersby found her and called police. Temperatures soared above 30 degree outside, but the temperature was closer to 50 degrees inside the vehicle when she was found. She was locked in the SUV while her daughter and granddaughter went shopping.
Health officials are advising people to take the following measures in this hot weather:
1. Keep hydrated by drinking lots of water and natural juices
2. Avoid even moderate physical activity
3. Avoid going out in the sun. If you do, wear a hat
4. Stay in cool places with air conditioning, such as shopping malls or libraries
5. Take periodic baths or showers if no air conditioning is available

