Mayor Valérie Plante said Monday that the next snow-removal operation( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-snow-removal-will-slow-this-weekend-to-give-crews-a-break ) could start almost as soon as the current one ends.
"We're already getting ready for the next storm," Plante said to reporters at city hall.
A snowfall warning( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67#184001396682812632201901280504ww1070cwul ) is in effect for the Montreal region, starting overnight Monday to Tuesday and continuing until Tuesday evening, with an expected accumulation of 15 centimetres and blowing snow.
"We're finishing the snow-removal operation but there's a good chance the two operations will overlap," she said.
The expected bill for clearing up after Tuesday's snowstorm and the one 10 days ago could be as high as $40 million for the two operations, she said.
"It's necessary, it's work we have to do and that Montrealers expect. It's been planned for in the budget," she said.
Earlier, opposition leader Lionel Perez accused the Plante administration of bungling snow removal and the spreading of abrasives on sidewalks.
"I think that topic No. 1 for all Montrealers is the current horrible state of sidewalks, the dangerous sidewalks that we have in Montreal throughout. There's tons of ice still on many parts of our city. It is simply unacceptable," he said.
"The administration has not responded the way it should. We hear excuses upon excuses," Perez added.
Plante dismissed the complaint, saying the city has done what it can given the drastic cocktail of weather in the past 10 days.
Removal of snow after the last snowstorm( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-more-snow-freezing-rain-and-rain-on-the-way ) was proceeding on schedule when rain followed by a freeze left sidewalks covered with ice, forcing work crews to switch gears and start spreading abrasives, she said. The current snow removal operation will be finished Wednesday, she said.

