With his googly eyes, soft fur the colour of Flamin' Hot Cheetos and unmistakable paunch, Youppi! doesn't come across as a bad boy.
Many fans of the Montreal Expos remember the mascot's goofy antics and hugs. Innocent stuff. His place in baseball history, however, has everything to do with a confrontation that took place 30 years ago today.
On Aug. 23, 1989, Youppi! became the first - and, to date, only - Major League Baseball mascot to be thrown out of a game by an umpire.
The Expos were hosting the Los Angeles Dodgers in what proved to be a chippy, low-scoring game.
In the top of the seventh inning, with the game scoreless and the teams arguing about a disputed call, Youppi! clambered atop the visiting team's dugout.
The clomp-clomp of his footsteps on the dugout's metal roof was picked up on the TV broadcast of the game. So was Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda's reaction.
"Get the f-k off my dugout," he could be heard shouting at Youppi!, before instructing some unseen person: "I don't want him jumping on my dugout."
Youppi! dismounted and protested his innocence by tracing the shape of a halo over his head using one of his large, orange fingers.
Four scoreless innings later, with the game dragging on, Youppi! changed into his pyjamas and appeared to take a nap on the Dodgers' dugout.
What happened next is the subject of some dispute.
Lasorda left his dugout and yelled in Youppi!'s direction. The third-base umpire then motioned for the mascot to leave the game.
The most common understanding of the incident is represented in the title of a 2017 Major League Baseball video( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pmzeK6oAtkk ): "Lasorda gets Youppi! tossed from the game."
But Claude Hubert, who was playing the part of Youppi! that night, tells a different version of the story.
"The fans were making lots of noise on the dugout," he explained to Télé-Québec's Guylaine Tremblay( http://bancpublic.telequebec.tv/emissions/emission-42/31772/claude-hubert-animateur-de-mascottes ) in a 2017 interview.
"Dodgers coach Tommy Lasorda came out and the first thing he saw was me. I explained that it wasn't me, it was the fans," Hubert continued. "He understood, but the third-base umpire thought he was yelling at me, so he said 'Youppi!, get out of the game.' "
What's a mascot to do in such a situation?
He picked up his pillow, shook his head in indignation and trudged away as the crowd chanted his name.
At the time, the orange rapscallion's ejection was not a major story. It barely featured in coverage of the game, which the Dodgers won 1-0 in 22 innings.
The next day, in a column about poor attendance at Expos games, Montreal Gazette columnist Jack Todd wrote "Youppi! is a fuzzy orange critter who belongs at La Ronde, not at a ballpark."
Youppi! may not frequent the ballpark anymore, but his ejection is now that night's legacy. In the intervening decades, his exploits have been popularized online. The ejection is now the subject of videos, listicles, Reddit discussions, memes and articles such as this one.
Baseball games - and even teams - can come and go, but mascot drama is forever.
Related
Jack Todd: MLB's 1994 strike marked start of perfect storm for peaking Expos( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-6zCt )
25 years ago, with the Expos in first, baseball went on strike( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-6ytm )

