A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Former mayor Applebaum appeals his ban from real estate profession( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/former-mayor-applebaum-barred-from-real-estate )
Disgraced former mayor Michael Applebaum is going to court to try to get his real estate licence back.
Applebaum has been trying to be readmitted to his former profession as a real estate agent since he was paroled from prison in June 2017, after serving two months of a one-year sentence for eight counts of fraud against the government, conspiracy to commit fraud, breach of trust and conspiracy to commit breach of trust.
Last fall, the organization regulating Quebec's real estate brokers rejected Applebaum's application to get his licence back, saying his crimes would taint the integrity of the profession and harm the public's confidence in real estate brokers.
Now, Applebaum is appealing the decision of the Organisme d'autoréglementation du courtage immobilier du Québec (OACIQ) in Quebec Court, saying he deserves a chance to rehabilitate himself and practice the profession he exercised for 22 years.
The OACIQ revoked his licence on April 30, 2017, three months after his conviction. Its rules specify it can refuse a licence to anyone guilty of a criminal act that is linked to their real estate practice.
Applebaum's lawyer, Pierre Teasdale, said in an interview that his crimes were not connected to his real estate practice, and that the OACIQ has allowed other people to practice as real estate brokers despite past criminal convictions.
Teasdale said Applebaum, 55, who has refused all interviews and kept a low profile since his release, has been going through a difficult time. "He's looking for a job. It's not easy," he said.
Applebaum's case is so public that he would never try to act illegally or unethically if allowed to sell real estate again, Teasdale argued.
"His case is so well-known, it's an additional protection for the public," he said.
The case will be heard on Oct. 16, according to Marie-Pierre Laflamme, a communications consultant for the OACIQ.
Montreal police officer to face trial in 2016 death of Montreal North man( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-police-officer-charged-with-manslaughter-will-go-to-trial )
A Montreal police officer charged with manslaughter in the death of a 46-year-old black man in 2016 will finally go to trial.
Quebec Superior Court Judge Pierre Labelle announced in a decision Tuesday that there was enough evidence to warrant a trial for Christian Gilbert, a police officer charged in connection with the death of Jean-Pierre Bony.
Bony was killed during a police raid in a Montreal North apartment complex on March 31, 2016. He had been hit by a rubber bullet. During the raid, Fredy Villanueva's brother Dany was arrested.
His death led to unrest in the borough - including a violent night of protest during which the local police station was vandalized - and renewed calls for improved race relations in Montreal North.
Labelle's decision concludes a months-long preliminary inquiry that began in February.
No date has been set for the trial.
Air conditioners in short supply after Montreal's weeklong heat wave( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/air-conditioners-in-short-supply-after-montreals-weeklong-heat-wave )
Heat-weary Montrealers who are finally breaking down and trying to purchase an air conditioner may be in for more frustration as they find many local retailers are out of stock.
"We are out," said Pierre Gagnon, manager of the electrical department at Montreal's largest Home Depot store, in St-Henri.
The store normally orders enough air conditioners to satisfy customer demand throughout the summer, stocking brands like LG, Toshiba, Danby and Comfort-Aire, normally only running out when they start stocking heaters. The stores order based on sales from the year before, Gagnon said.
But this summer, the prolonged heat wave that hit Montreal from June 29 to July 5, with temperatures reaching a high of 35 C on July 2, wiped out his stock. About a week after that, the store got another delivery, and that load was wiped out about an hour after the store opened, he said.
Gagnon said it is pretty much the same story at all Home Depots across Montreal, as well as other retailers.
"We all take our inventory from (the same) suppliers," he added. "Sales would normally be spread out over the whole summer. Now it all happened in one shot. We got emptied. Nobody saw it coming."
He said reordering from the manufacturers is not an option, since orders must be placed months in advance.
"This is all imported. So to get stuff from China into Canada, into the distribution (system) ... by the time it hits the store, it is months and months and months of planning, so it's not like (more units) are readily available."
It was the same story at stores like Walmart and Canadian Tire.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

