Welcome to no-drama Canada.
The Canadian vote is only 37 days off, but we're not paying much attention. We're too glued to more spectacular dramas playing in England and the U.S.
Many of us are binging on Brexit, a British thriller with way bigger ratings than The Crown.
The plot: New PM Boris Johnson suspends Parliament hoping to sneak through a no-deal Brexit, but Parliament courageously revolts and outvotes him. Boris then kicks 21 members out of his party - and his own brother quits.
What happens next? Will England leave the EU? Will Scotland leave the U.K.? Will the Queen leave England for safe refuge in Ottawa? Stay tuned for more great British drama!
Meanwhile, the daily drama factory to our south is equally binge and cringeworthy. In the latest episodes, President Trump tries to buy Greenland, then plays Meteorologist-in-Chief by predicting Hurricane Dorian will hit Alabama - and proving it with a weather map doctored by a Sharpie.
When U.S. national meteorologists disagree, the government threatens to fire them - and maybe even cancel all weather predictions except the president's.
What happens next? Will the president play medical researcher and announce a cure for cancer - Diet Coke (his favourite drink) - then order national cola vaccinations?
Meanwhile, here in slow-news Canada, a recent poll shows our two largest parties' leaders are both seen more unfavourably than favourably - and the election is an unpopularity contest.
I watched my third U.S. democratic presidential debate Thursday, with at least nine more scheduled - way more than we'll have during the entire Canadian election. The U.S. campaign already seems to have gone on three years, while ours will be a five-week hiccup.
How can we possibly compete? How can we catch the eye of Canadian voters, let alone the world? Here are some bold, dramatic ideas to add some buzz to our ballot:
1 - It's too late to make headlines by buying Greenland, but there are other "lands" we can still purchase that would make big news. Why not make the U.S. an offer to buy Disneyland, or Frontierland, or Cleveland, or Portland, or Manhattan Island?
Alternatively, we could offer to buy Scotland once it leaves England after England leaves the EU.
2 - Our PM could make global news by turning weatherman and predicting a wonderful heat wave if he's elected in October. Then he could show a Sharpie-drawn map with Toronto and Montreal included in the latest Miami weather projections.
When Environment Canada issues a correction saying no Canadian heat waves are expected before next summer, Trudeau could fire the whole agency, saying it doesn't fit with his philosophy of "sunny ways."
3 - Trudeau could go rogue and attack the one per cent, like Bernie Sanders does, although Trudeau is probably part of it. Elizabeth May could join Elizabeth Warren and demand Medicare-for-all - oops we already have it.
Andrew Scheer could add some desperately needed charisma during our debates by starting to shout like Bernie Sanders:
"LET ME BE VERY CLEAR, PEOPLE! IT'S TIME FOR MORE CARBON - NOT CARBON TAXES! MORE PIPELINES - NOT POT LINES! TIME FOR AN OIL CHANGE - NOT CLIMATE CHANGE!"
4 - If none of this gets voters' attention, here's a dramatic idea guaranteed to make Canadian and world headlines. Our government could announce our own thrilling version of Brexit by proposing a referendum for Canada to leave .... North America!
We'd call it Nexit. Trudeau could declare we're not getting anything out of the continent anymore: all the news is about the U.S., all the good TV is on Netflix, the U.S. even gets the best weather.
It's time to LEAVE North America by digging a canal between the two countries - and making the U.S. pay for it.
Like the EU, the U.S. would demand Canada pay back what we owe them: the U.S. Open tennis trophy that Bianca Andreescu just won. Otherwise they'll bar us from playing and rename the tournament "The U.S. Closed."
For added news coverage, Trudeau could arrange to box with Vladimir Putin, form a trade alliance with Kim Jong Un and wear his India costume at the debates, guaranteeing more world headlines.
Meanwhile, Scheer could appear on Saturday Night Live and outdo famed hypnotist Reveen by putting the entire audience to sleep - without using hypnosis.
As for Elizabeth May and Jagmeet Singh, they could talk about dull, irrelevant topics like the growing rich-poor gap and climate change.
I know my ideas already have you thinking excitedly about the Canadian election, but this being Canada I fear they won't happen.
Instead we'll have a few polite TV debates with no sharp exchanges, no hateful rhetoric, no trolling insults and no major headlines or gaffes - just tedious arguments over jobs, the economy, the environment and MuchMoreLavalin.
It will be a sensible election with little anger, division or emotion. How boring can you get?
But that's the price of living in no-drama Canada.
Joshfreed49@gmail.com( mailto:Joshfreed49@gmail.com )

