This post will be updated throughout the day on Tuesday, Aug. 25.
Questions/comments: rbruemmer@postmedia.com
Top updates
Women harder hit than men by COVID-19 in Montreal
Virtual 'contact free' tickets coming to Montreal buses
Hundreds of teachers staying home over COVID-19 fears
Quebec averaging fewer than 80 cases a day: Dubé
Quebec logs 62 new cases, two deaths
Quebec shelves plans for COVID-19 tracing app
Quebec extends eligibility for school meal programs
Montreal's pandemic fallout: opposition demands answers
Griffintown pizzeria shut over multiple COVID-19 concerns
Quebec's back-to-school plan inadequate, say doctors, scientists
4:25 p.m. In Montreal, more women than men affected by COVID-19
The city's public health department released the following findings in an analysis of how the coronavirus pandemic is affecting men and women differently in the Montreal area:
More women than men in Montreal have contracted COVID-19. Women account for 58 per cent of all cases. Researchers theorize that it is because more women work directly with people, such as in health care occupations, than men
46 per cent of women who have contracted the disease are health care workers, as compared to 19 per cent of men
In terms of hospitalizations it was virtually equal: women made up 51 per cent, men 49 per cent
Although the disease is more prevalent among women, the disease is more severe in men, and mortality rates are higher. Researchers don't know why yet.
Psychologically, however, it is women who are more affected. More women have been afraid of being infected or infecting others, had problems sleeping and experienced moments of anxiety.
See a summary of the report here and the full report (in French) here.
3:45 p.m. Virtual 'contact free' tickets coming to Montreal buses
Riders on Montreal-areas buses will be able to use virtual "contact free" tickets available for purchase via smartphones as of Sept. 1.
They will cost $3.50 each and be valid for 120 minutes once activated. They can be purchased at the Apple app store or at the Google Store at Chrono or Transit.
Once activated, the user will show the bus driver the screen of their phone before boarding.
See our full story here.
3:45 p.m. Troubling uptick of COVID-19 among the young: Labos
Basic statistics indicate that the greater the number of young people who are infected, the greater the number of young people who will die, even if such deaths are likely to remain relatively rare, writes columnist Dr. Christopher Labos.
The troubling trend in recent days has been the uptick of new coronavirus infections in young people. New cases in those under 40 have been on the rise especially in places like British Columbia and Ontario. The uptick in new cases was so concerning to officials that recruited actor Ryan Reynolds to reach this younger demographic.
See the full column by Dr. Christopher Labos here.
2 p.m. Hundreds of teachers staying home over COVID-19 fears
With classes set to resume on Thursday, Quebec's largest school service centre is scrambling to fill spaces, reassign posts and deal with last-minute retirements.
The Centres des services scolaire de Montréal (formerly the Commission scolaire de Montréal) has granted medical exemptions to 420 teachers who fear they could contract COVID-19 if they return to the classroom during the coronavirus pandemic.
About 991 teachers had applied for medical exemptions, the centre said. The service centre has 9,500 teachers.
See our full story here by Katherine Wilton.
1:20 p.m. Quebec averaging fewer than 80 cases a day: Dubé
Quebec has been averaging fewer than 80 cases a day over the last week, indicating it has the pandemic under control at this point, Quebec Health Minister Christian Dubé said Tuesday at a press briefing in Montreal.
That works out to approximately 10 cases per million inhabitants.
A flattened curve represents 20 cases per one million, so Quebec should not go beyond 160 cases a day, Dubé said. The province recently saw a spike to 180 cases, which was worrisome, Dubé said, but public health authorities were able to contain the outbreaks.
"As long as we keep cases below 20 per 1 million, we can continue life as we know it now. It's not perfect, but it's manageable," Dubé said.
Quebec registered 62 new cases on Tuesday.
MNA Éric Caire confirmed Quebec will not be using a province-wide smartphone tracing app to try and limit the coronavirus at this point, because experts had many reservations about such an app's efficacy. Quebec's contact tracing system is working well at this point, given the low number of cases. If numbers surge, Quebec could look into using the app, he said.
Asked why Quebec is not mandating masks in classrooms when hundreds of teachers have expressed concern and many are not returning to class, public health director Horacio Arruda said the government is striking a balance between children's need to learn and socialize, and the risk, which the government deems minimal if a two-metre distance is observed. If cases increase, the government could mandate masks, he said.
Teachers have argued it will be impossible to maintain spacing in classes of 38 children with small rooms.
Dubé stressed it was crucial to contain spread of the disease so regular surgeries can be carried out. "We must do this for the people who are sick, and not just those who have COVID. I'm thinking of people who have cancer."
"The virus is still present," Dubé said. "I distinguish between a small fire and a forest fire. ... Every time there is wind, the small fire can become a forest fire. If people are not careful, there could be so many small fires that it becomes a forest fire."
See our full story here by Jason Magder and Philip Authier.
12:15 p.m. Young people make up nearly 50 per cent of cases: Tam
Canada's chief public health officer Dr. Theresa Tam reported young people under 40 account for 46 per cent of all new cases of COVID-19 in the country.
The 20 to 29-year-old age group is particularly over-represented, accounting for 25 per cent of cases nationally, but only 14 per cent of the population.
While most young people will only experience mild symptoms, their infections "build a reservoir of the virus that can spill over, affecting young and old," she said during the federal government's daily press briefing on Tuesday. Tam encouraged all Canadians to do their part to stem the spread of the pandemic.
Nationally, Canada now has 125,647 cases, and 9,083 deaths. More than 48,000 people are being tested daily, on average. About .7 per cent test positive.
An average of 400 people test positive daily, down from the 1,800 positives experienced during the pandemic's peak.
12 p.m. Marguerite-Bourgeoys service centre offers virtual classes
The Marguerite-Bourgeoys school service centre (formerly known as a school board) announced it is putting in place a virtual school for students on its territory who have to stay at home during the pandemic for medical reasons.
Classes will be offered for pre-school, elementary and high school students. An educator will be available to guide students. Students must have a medical certificate indicating they cannot attend class.
The virtual school is scheduled to begin Sept. 8.
For more information, ecoleeva@csmb.qc.ca
Montreal opposition presses Plante for specifics on pandemic's financial fallout

