The weather predictions before Wednesday's snowstorm( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/evolution-of-the-storm-delay-travel-montrealers-told-ahead-of-mega-blizzard ) sounded like terror warnings. There was talk of mega-blizzards, Snowmageddon and "snow bombs," while weather reporters sounded like sportscasters crying:
"Will we break the Montreal Olympic snow record for all time?"
By Tuesday night, schools had cancelled classes and CEGEPs and universities soon followed, declaring Snow Days.
An old-fashioned part of me rebelled: It seemed yet another sign we were all becoming weather wimps who increasingly hide from winter in our cars, malls, indoor hockey rinks and underground cities.
Only two days earlier, a U.S. paper had called me to talk winter and mentioned Toronto was declaring a Snow Day - and I'd scoffed at that city. Now we were doing the same.
"What next?" I thought. "Would we call in the army?"
However, when I stepped out of my house Wednesday morning( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/live-major-snowstorm-wallops-montreal-33-cm-so-far ), I reconsidered my feelings. I saw a street full of neighbours who looked like anything but weather wimps.
My block was a blinding white landscape, dotted with people frenetically shovelling out cars from waist-high mountains of snow. Many cars were so completely clumped in snow, I had to clear off several licence plates just to see which clump was mine.
Other people were plowing out walkways or helping neighbours push cars. The sound of spinning wheels, straining motors and window scrapers filled the air in a Symphony of Winter Survival Sounds.
Yet many people were in a surprisingly good mood. Some were parents relieved they didn't have to drive their kids to school in snow and traffic. Others had been inspired by Snow Day - and decided to play hooky from work.
As Snow Day went on, I saw other benefits. It was a warm, beautiful winter day, so kids were making snow angels in my park. Farther north in Rosemont, there was a lane party going on nicknamed "La guerre des tuques," where families celebrated winter with old-fashioned snowball fights, instead of whining.
Plateau-Mont-Royal had chosen to clean the Jeanne Mance Park bike path before most sidewalks, although no one was cycling. But at least people could jog and walk on it.
On the Main, at least half my local stores were closed, as shop owners took their own personal Snow Day. A lawyer friend said half his office's support staff never showed up - but the firm had to pay them for a Snow Day anyway.
But that created another dilemma. People who had struggled to come in felt they were working for nothing, and should have stayed home. In the end, the office gave double time to those who had made it - could this be a Canadian legal precedent for Snow Day pay?
One person enjoying a semi-Snow Day was my mailman, Maxim, who told me (next day):
"Snowstorms are usually impossible! You can't park, so you leave the truck a block away, then trudge through snow up to your knees with big stacks of mail. Many people don't clear their stairs, so you can't even deliver their mail and have to carry it back."
He says this was the first snowstorm when Canada Post told mail carriers to forget private residences and just deliver to companies and large apartments. Still, "everyone got their mail - only a day late."
So many people declared their own personal Snow Day, you could find a rush-hour seat on some normally jam-packed métro lines. With motorists off the roads, there was also a lovely silence as the snow seemed to muffle all sound.
Downtown was as quiet as a weekend morning. The best part was the fresh snow covered up downtown's black glacial ice we've been slithering on like crabs for weeks - so you could finally dump your crampons.
Once the snow melts and the ice re-surfaces, I have a great idea to prevent this problem in the future: How about those heated Ste-Catherine St. sidewalks that Projet Montréal nixed?
Late Wednesday, I left my house an hour early for my weekly tennis game, expecting nightmarish, dangerous traffic - but I got there easier and faster than ever since no one else was on the road.
It all had a sense of "je me souviens," reminding me of snowstorms of my youth when schools, stores and life shut down everywhere because there was no choice.
We didn't have the snow-cleaning equipment to quickly clear streets back then, or today's four-wheel-drive snow-busting vehicles, so the city just stopped still for Mother Nature's snow days.
Eventually, we developed today's arsenal of anti-snow technology and our new 24/7 mentality took over, where we take pride in keeping our city and schools running whatever the weather.
But I've suddenly become a convert and a fan of Toronto-style Snow Days. I think we should have more of them whenever it snows a lot - or even a little.
In fact, Monday is a holiday in most other provinces called Family Day, that Quebecers don't get.
Snow Day, anyone?
Joshfreed49@gmail.com( mailto:Joshfreed49@gmail.com )
Related
Josh Freed: Most men are lagging when it comes to reusable bagging( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/josh-freed-most-men-are-lagging-when-it-comes-to-reusable-bagging )
Josh Freed: Our crummy winter weather is a U.S. national emergency( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/josh-freed-our-crummy-winter-weather-is-a-u-s-national-emergency )
Read more columns from Josh Freed:( https://montrealgazette.com/?s=josh+freed )

