One of Montreal's longest-running homeless shelters is in dire straits.
Donations have dried up and so too has government funding. As it stands, St-Michael's Mission( https://www.stmichaelsmissionmtl.org/ ) barely has enough cash on hand to cover rent and payroll for the seven employees who keep the place running.
"We're living hand to mouth right now," says George Greene, the shelter's executive director. "It's not clear how much longer we can keep going."
Greene says St. Michael's - also known as the Red Roof - has been hit with a perfect storm. Exceptionally cold weather forced the downtown day shelter to stay open overnight through much of the winter so homeless men and women wouldn't freeze to death on the streets.
A few weeks back, two of the mission's biggest donors pulled $100,000 in funding. Meanwhile, the Quebec government is diverting grants to "housing first" initiatives.
The Red Roof gets its name from the roof of the Church of St-John the Evangelist that houses it on President-Kennedy Ave.
Last year, the provincial government set aside $11 million to get homeless people off the streets and into low-cost apartments in Montreal, Quebec City and the Montérégie region.
The Public Health Ministry says the goal is to get 1,000 people into homes and says it's hit about 85 per cent of that target.
Much of that funding goes to programs run by larger shelters like the Old Brewery Mission and the Welcome Hall Mission - leaving places like the Red Roof out in the cold.
Greene said the Red Roof could very well close its doors this summer after nearly 90 years of service to downtown Montreal.
That could be disastrous for Charlie Nuktie.
At 63, Nuktie is getting a bit old for the street life. Three years ago, a stroke left him with paralysis in his left leg and he needs a walker to get around.
Nuktie sleeps on the concrete steps outside St-Michael's most nights.
"I'm not as tough as I used to be but I'm still here," says Nuktie, a retired electrician who struggles with alcohol addiction. "And I'll still be here tomorrow."
When he rises every morning, he can count on the Red Roof for a warm shower, a bowl of oatmeal and a cup of tea. He'll sit in the cafeteria, read the newspaper and catch up on the neighbourhood gossip with any one of the dozens of homeless men and women who frequent the centre.
"It feels like home," says Nuktie. "They know me and I know them."
The people who flock to the downtown mission do so because of this personal touch. When Greene spotted Nuktie smoking a cigarette across from the Place des Arts métro earlier this week, he noticed something was off.
Nuktie's walker is so short, the elderly man has to hunch over just to lean on it.
"We're getting you a new walker today," says Greene. "You can't go on like this, Charlie."
George Greene, who runs the Red Roof, chats with worker Mateo Pablo in the clothing storage room.
Despite the presence of housing programs and shelters that can give people like Nuktie a warm bed every night, thousands chose to sleep on the streets every night in Montreal.
For safety reasons, overnight shelters don't allow people to show up intoxicated. And there have been problems with elderly, more vulnerable people having their personal effects stolen as they sleep.
Whatever the reason, many chose to take their chances on the streets and use shelters like the Red Roof during the day. In St-Michael's case, their clientele includes roughly 40 homeless men and women and they serve about 250 meals per day.
Nearly half of its clients are Indigenous and many among them are survivors of the residential school system.
But earlier this week at a general assembly, Greene broke the news to his volunteers workers and donors that their work may all be coming to an end.
It's difficult to overstate how attached Greene is to the centre.
He still keeps a photo of Kimberly Gloade on his desk. Gloade, who was a regular at the Red Roof, died of cirrhosis two years ago after being turned away at the McGill University Health Centre's Glen Site( http://montrealgazette.com/feature/the-life-and-death-of-kimberly-gloade ).
The shelter held a vigil in her honour that winter and Greene says her death still haunts him.
"I can't picture my life without the Red Roof, I can't picture it without people like Charlie or Kim (Gloade) in it," says Greene. "We're a family and I know I'll keep fighting for that family."
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/titocurtis( ccurtis@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

