It seems that ecologists are not the only ones concerned by climate change - their worries are shared by the man in charge of Hydro-Québec.
In an interview with the Presse Canadienne, Hydro-Québec president Éric Martel( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/bonuses-increase-by-13-per-cent-at-hydro-quebec-reach-29-3-million ) said he was "very worried by climate change, to be honest," if only because the vagaries of nature and weather are costing the Crown corporation millions.
Overtime claims last year at Hydro-Québec reached $165 million, boosted by severe storms and the subsequent hours spent dealing with 24,478 power failures - an increase of 4,500 compared with 2017. That's four times as many incidents as in the 1980s.
"It's clear that climate change is having an impact on our business," said Martel, who is speaking up at a moment when the issue of climate change is becoming a major topic of public concern. Almost daily, pressure is building on the Legault government to do more to fight greenhouse gas emissions.
Martel suggests that the social costs of climate change are simply going to increase. He cites as an example the cost of tree maintenance for Hydro-Québec. Given that trees are growing more quickly, those costs have jumped from $65 million to $73 million in the space of one year - a spike of about 15 per cent.
"Since 2000, a tree in Montreal grows about five inches a year, and the vegetation is growing more quickly," said Martel. "These changes were once occurring over the space of millennia, now its happening in 18 to 19 years. That's why we're asking for increases to the Energy Board budget."
The utility describes itself as being "in action" on the issue of climate change. Besides seeking more funding for the increased costs, Hydro-Québec has hired about a dozen meteorologists to examine such weather phenomena as freezing rain, which paralyzes some regions of Quebec.
"What kind of precipitation will we be seeing in the next 20, 30, 40, 50 years? Will we be seeing more or less?" asks Martel, who adds he has no idea what the long-term effects will be on the utility's equipment. "Our transformers, for example, will they last as long? Will the equipment in our stations become more vulnerable if there's freezing rain more often?"
Martel cites the flooding seasons( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood ) as creating problems for his employees, who are required to monitor the rate of snow melt and the water levels of each river. Hydro-Québec fills its reservoirs when needed, the installations allowing water levels and flow rates to be controlled.
Without Hydro-Québec's water controls, the floods of 2017 would have been far worse, Martel said, noting that those who were flooded in the south of the province would have "easily had an extra metre more."
"There would have been a lot more people flooded."

