Busy day? Here's what you might have overlooked.
A young couple who say they were the victims of police violence for "walking while black"( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/couple-fined-444-each-for-talking-loudly ) are calling on the mayors of Montreal and Plateau-Mont-Royal to take responsibility for "excessive force, abuse of power and racism." Both were given $444 tickets for making excessive noise. At a news conference Saturday organized by the Centre for Research-Action on Race Relations (CRARR), Brian Mann and his girlfriend, who chose not to give her name for fear it could hamper her career, said they were walking down St-Laurent Blvd. near Roy St. on Saturday, April 7 at about 10 a.m., talking and laughing, when a police cruiser pulled alongside. The two officers told the couple they were being too loud. Mann, who is 31, white and the executive director of Concordia University Television (CUTV), said he asked the officers if there was a law against talking and laughing. They responded they would decide what defines too loud, Mann said.
Carlos Vela scored from the penalty spot in the 83rd minute as expansion-side Los Angeles FC overcame an Ignacio Piatti hat trick to defeat the 10-man Montreal Impact 5-3 at Saputo Stadium on Saturday afternoon.( http://montrealgazette.com/pmn/sports-pmn/carlos-velas-penalty-kick-leads-lafc-past-10-man-montreal-impact-5-3/wcm/7c93b4c1-1567-43a4-b448-3de8ba66b5f4 ) Los Angeles (4-2-0) scored four unanswered second-half goals for their second consecutive victory. Montreal (2-5-0) has lost three straight. Laurent Ciman scored in his return to Montreal, his first game back since being traded to Los Angeles in the off-season. Benny Feilhaber and Latif Blessing added goals for the visitors while Impact defender Jukka Raitala scored an own goal. It was the first all-time meeting between the Impact and LAFC. Montreal went down a player in the 31st minute when Victor Cabrera was shown a straight red card for a tackle on Marco Urena in the penalty box. Urena stepped up to the spot but Evan Bush got his fingers on the low, powerful shot. Montreal was leading 2-1.
The risk of flooding is minimal this weekend, but Quebec's civil security department is warning that higher temperatures( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/flood-watch-begins-in-quebec-as-temperatures-rise ) forecast for the coming week could spur a faster melt of the snow cover and ice on rivers and lakes. The department is closely monitoring water levels around the province. Water levels are presently below normal conditions throughout the province, but regional civil security organizations are in constant contact with municipalities situated near rivers, and are ready to intervene.
CREDIT: Kevin Mio, Montreal Gazette

