QUEBEC - Describing the situation as embarrassing, Premier François Legault Tuesday made a passionate plea for Quebecers to come forward and be trained as CHSLD orderlies before a potential second wave of COVID-19 hits.
"I need 10,000 people of good will to take on this noble task," Legault said at his pandemic news conference. "Our goal is to mobilize 10,000 people to take care of our most vulnerable.
"I am asking all Quebecers from the bottom of my heart."
Promised last week, Legault said Quebec will open training courses for workers, which will run from June 15 to Sept. 15.
They will soon be able to sign up on this website
"There's no guarantee we'll make it but we have to work, all together, to succeed."
Legault said he's also ready to take the heat from unions that might complain Quebec is creating two categories of workers. Under the program, workers will be paid $21 an hour during training. If they succeed they will make $26 an hour to earn about $49,000 a year.
He said while 2020 may be known for the tragic death of thousands of seniors he hopes it will also be known as the year Quebec finally fixed the problem in CHSLDs.
On hand for the announcement, Education Minister Jean-François Roberge said the program will include classroom training but also practical training in the worksite.
pauthier@postmedia.com
Twitter.com/philipauthier
Related
Trudeau announces $2.2 billion more in COVID-19 relief, this time to big cities
Quebecers less frightened of COVID-19, adapting to restrictions, study suggests
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for June 2 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

