A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
SAQ stores reopen, but more strike days planned if negotiations stall( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/saq-stores-reopen-but-more-strike-days-planned-if-negotiations-stall )
Société des alcools du Québec stores are open again Wednesday after unionized store workers went on strike Tuesday.
Simon Desjardins, an SAQ worker and union representative, said Tuesday's strike showed the employer the union was serious, but said it's still too early to assess the action's impact on contract negotiations.
"There's another day at the negotiation table" Thursday, Desjardins said. "It's really then that we'll see whether what we did will change anything," he said.
The union says they will determine whether they plan to use their five additional strike days after Thursday's negotiations.
Heat wave: Death toll reaches 53 in Montreal, but could get higher( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-wave-death-toll-reaches-53-in-montreal-but-could-get-higher )
Fifty-three deaths in Montreal were potentially caused by the record-breaking heat wave that took over the city in early July, says a new report by the public health department released Wednesday. But that number could continue to rise.
The total presented in the department's preliminary report does not include deaths that occurred in hospitals, only those that occurred within the community from June 30 to July 8, said Dr. David Kaiser, a physician with Santé Montréal. They still have to go through hospital records to determine which deaths may have been heat-related.
He expects that most cases will be of people who were brought to hospitals after being exposed to the heat and died shortly after. More than 5,400 people were taken to hospitals by ambulance throughout the heat wave, says the public health department's report. At the time, Urgences-Santé reported that the number of calls they received was up 30 per cent.
Kaiser said he doesn't expect the death toll to increase substantially. After the 2010 heat wave, which saw temperatures of more than 35 C for five days, he said only 15 per cent of the 106 deaths occurred in hospitals.
Overall, Kaiser said Montreal saw 10 to 15 more deaths per day during the recent heat wave. As of July 9, another 34 deaths were reported elsewhere in Quebec. The province's Ministry of Health and Social Services said a final province-wide death toll will be released in the fall.
SQ divers recover body of Montreal swimmer from Bas-St-Laurent lake( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sq-divers-recover-body-of-montreal-swimmer-from-bas-st-laurent-lake )
Sûreté du Québec (SQ) divers on Wednesday found the body of a 24-year-old Montreal man who disappeared the night before in a Bas-St-Laurent-region lake.
Police said the body was recovered from Lake Pohénégamook around 11 a.m.
The SQ had received an emergency call aroundt 4:45 p.m. Tuesday that a swimmer in the lake seemed to be having difficulty.
A search by local firefighters ended at 9 p.m. Tuesday.
Police will interview witnesses in an effort to determine what happened.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

