It was Game 7 against the Boston Bruins last April, possibly the worst night of Jake Gardiner’s career.
With the Leafs down 5-4, Gardiner made a stretch pass from his own zone to the Boston blue line.
The intended receiver was Patrick Marleau, but Boston defenceman Zdeno Chara sent the puck back toward the Leaf net and David Pastrnak scored. It was 6-4 Bruins, who would add an empty-netter en route to a 7-4 win . Minus-5 for Gardiner. The Leafs’ season was over.
In an emotional post-game interview, Gardiner took the blame for the loss. At that moment, Carl Gunnarsson was texting his good buddy and former teammate.
“I wouldn’t put all the blame on Jake. I feel bad for him,” said Gunnarsson. “You need a little tip from the forward. Didn’t get it. It came back. You can’t blame him 100 per cent.”
Fans of the Maple Leafs, and maybe even Gardiner himself, might never be able to forget the moment. But they should. Because the stretch pass — from the defensive zone to a waiting winger across centre ice — is becoming more prevalent across the league as a means to create offence.
“It’s a big part of the speed game that’s being played today,” says Penguins coach Mike Sullivan. “The ability to stretch the ice, and pull defencemen back and create gap challenges. There’s a lot of strategy by utilizing the stretch guy, and taking advantage of the speed underneath.”
The statistics show the stretch pass is effective. When it works, it can be spectacular. When it doesn’t work, it hardly ever hurts the team making the pass.
“Defences are trying to move the puck up in a hurry,” says Kings coach John Stevens. “Players recognize when their team has possession, you start heading to open ice. We’re talking about how much the game is faster. It’s not just guys are skating faster. It’s the puck speed that’s making the game faster.”
If it is possible to be the best at something and the worst at the same thing — at the same time — then the Maple Leafs own those titles regarding the stretch pass.
According to thepointhockey.com, the Maple Leafs led the league last season in stretch-pass attempts (1,564) and were worst in the league in stretch-pass completion percentage (59.4 per cent).
The thing is, the Leafs’ 929 completed passes — second in the league — led to far more scoring chances for than the missed passes led to scoring chances against.
“Complete 10 stretch passes that lead to goals, screw one up that ends up in your net and guess what people remember?” said statistician Mike Kelly, who authored the stretch pass report for Point Hockey.
Kelly says the stretch pass is to hockey what home runs are to baseball: Pass completion rates and batting averages don’t matter as long as the play works often enough to create offence. Excluding goals following faceoffs, Kelly’s research shows almost 75 per cent of goals come within 10 seconds of entering the zone, with another 10 per cent coming in the next five seconds. Thus the effectiveness of a stretch pass.
“A completed stretch pass can lead to a controlled zone entry, odd-man rush or breakaway — all increasing a team’s chances of producing a scoring chance and ultimately a goal. ... As for incompletions, more often than not an incomplete stretch pass will lead to a neutral zone puck battle that can be won by either team. Rarely are these passes picked off clean and taken back the other way for a quality chance.”
The stretch pass is here to stay.
“If it works, most time it’s going to be an offensive chance,” says Gardiner. “If it doesn’t, you usually the get the puck in and go on offence.”
ON A STREAK: Sebastian Aho has points in all nine of Carolina’s games, inching closer to the franchise record of 11 games set by Ron Francis. ... Colorado’s Nathan MacKinnon and Mikko Rantanen are tied for the franchise’s longest point streak to start a season (nine games) with Joe Sakic and Anton Stastny, who did it in 1988.
STICKING WITH IT: Ottawa sniper Mark Stone switched sticks and it paid off with a two-goal performance against Montreal over the weekend. “I’ve always wanted to use a bigger curve to help my shot,” he told Ottawa reporters. “I think, if you look at all the guys that are sharpshooters, they’re using pretty big curves, so I thought I’d give it a try. It’s a bit of a toe curve, but it’s just a bit bigger. I usually use a relatively straight curve and I handle the puck better, but I like this one. Everything is the same (about the stick). Just the blade is different.”
ON THE REBOUND: Dallas goaltending coach Jeff Reese said the team keeps internal numbers which say goalie Ben Bishop — off to his best start in a Stars uniform — has been good at redirecting rebounds and limiting opportunities. Reese also makes the distinction between a good rebound and a bad rebound. A good one heads out of harm’s way, likely to the corner. A bad one bounces back to the slot for another scoring chance. “When you throw a puck at the net, if we’re going to kick them right back out in the slot, it makes it really tough on your defence to find it,” Reese told the Dallas Morning News. “When you’re boxing out, they don’t know where it is. It makes it tough on the D. The better you can control your rebounds, obviously, the better it is for everybody.”
COLD KNIGHTS: The Vegas Golden Knights’ second line — featuring Max Pacioretty and Erik Haula — has yet to score a goal. Paul Stastny started on the line until getting hurt in the third game of the season. Tomas Hyka is on the right wing lately. Pacioretty and Haula have yet to find the net in the nearly 78 minutes they’ve played 5-on-5 with any other player on their line, though they have generated 56 total scoring chances together while allowing just 35. “Overall, me and Max are probably a little frustrated with not being able to get on the board,” Haula told the Las Vegas Review Journal. “Not that we’ve played bad or anything, it’s just one of those times where it’s not going in.”
BOWER POWER: Meadowvale Four Rinks in Mississauga will dedicate Rink 1 to Maple Leafs great Johnny Bower. It is the rink closest to where the late goalie lived. He wore No. 1 during four-time Stanley Cup winning careers. “It is an honour to recognize Johnny Bower at the arena where he was well known as a mentor to many young hockey players and where his grandchildren skated,” said Pat Saito, Councillor, Ward 9. Bower died on Dec. 26.
FROM THE KHL: Toronto-born defenceman Mathew Maione of Dinamo Riga is leading the KHL in scoring with six goals and 18 assists. The 27-year-old played for the Niagara Ice Dogs and Guelph Storm 2008-10. This is his first year in the KHL. ... Vienna will host its first KHL games later this week when Slovan Bratislava play a couple of home games there against CSKA and SKA.
FROM THE CWHL: The Toronto Furies won a pair of games in Worcester over the weekend, with Natalie Spooner scoring both in a 2-1 win over the Blades on Saturday, and Shiann Darkangelo scoring both in a 2-0 win in Sunday. ... In Montreal, the Canadiennes swept the Markham Thunder in a pair of games, 5-1 and 7-1. ... Canadian Olympian Jill Saulnier is leading the CWHL in scoring with three goals, four assists in four games.
REMEMBERING WRITERS: The Professional Hockey Writers Association is honouring two long-time Members who died last season, Red Fisher of the Montreal Gazette and Steve Harris of the Boston Herald. Profile pictures of both hockey writers are depicted on the bottom right corner of all PHWA membership cards for the 2018-19 NHL season. The cards this year feature the Red, White and Blue of the Stanley Cup champion Washington Capitals. Fisher covered hockey since 1955 until his death at 91 in January, and was a founder of the 300-member PHWA, established in 1967. His No. 1 PHWA card will be retired — the first badge number to be retired in the association’s history. Harris died in February at age 66. He had been covering the Bruins since the 1979.
Kevin McGran is a sports reporter based in Toronto. Follow him on Twitter: @kevin_mcgran

CAPTION: Jake Gardiner, seen here flipping a backhander down the ice and away from the Bruins' Tommy Wingels during Game 4 last spring, might have had one of the most excrutiating games of his young career in Game 7, when his stretch pass was intercepted. The picked-off pass resulted in a crucial David Pastrnak goal.
CREDIT: Kevin McGran

