Rémi Garde, the Impact's first-year head coach, has complained about a lack of depth on his roster. But if Montreal can weather the storm of its early-season schedule, top-heavy with road games, some interesting scenarios could play out.
Saturday afternoon at Olympic Stadium, seeking its first victory following two defeats, Garde tinkered with his roster against Toronto FC, dressing centre-back Rod Fanni, signed barely two weeks ago, for the first time. He moved Michael Petrasso to midfield and, more important, used Jeisson Vargas at striker along with star and captain Ignacio Piatti.
Meanwhile, striker Matteo Mancosu, who missed a practice during the week for what the team described as a therapy day, wasn't dressed.
Vargas, the 20-year-old Chilean, scored in the 41st minute - the first time this season Montreal has opened the scoring - and the goal stood up, the Impact off the schneid following this 1-0 victory before 26,005 spectators.
"That result was big for us, considering we had two away games, which is tough. We needed the three points today," Petrasso said. "This was a big result for us. We scored early and fought our way through it.
"I thought (Garde's personnel decisions) was good. He obviously watched clips on Toronto and saw a way we could keep them from creating opportunities and keeping their key players in places where they weren't dangerous. I think that helped a lot. They didn't have many chances in the first half. Piatti and Vargas were dangerous today."
Garde should have more reinforcements at his disposal in the coming days. Numerous reports have suggested both Uruguay's Alejandro Silva, a right-back/midfielder, and Rudy Camacho, a French defender, are about to be signed. And now Garde must also determine whether his squad is more dangerous without Mancosu?
Piatti and Vargas combined for eight of the Impact's 14 shots - two on target - while creating six chances. Montreal could have easily scored more goals against Toronto had the talented Piatti, who set up Vargas on the goal, relied more frequently on his playmaking abilities on this day.
"They (Piatti and Vargas) were spectacular today," Petrasso said. "I think it helped, obviously scoring the goal was good. Them two playing together, they kept the ball, which helped us - especially when your wingers are fullbacks going up and down. You get tired. Knowing you can play it up to Piatti or Vargas and they keep it for you, which allows you time to get up. That helped a lot."
Suddenly, it's Toronto, the defending Major League Soccer Cup champions, who are winless in two games, although that statistic comes with a caveat.
The Reds were playing their second game in four days after capturing the Champions League quarter-final in Mexico against Tigres UANL, losing the second leg of the two-game aggregate, but advancing on the away-goal tiebreaker. Nonetheless, Greg Vanney's squad proved remarkably resilient, showing few signs of the emotional and physical toll it must have felt. And Vanney dressed all his stars - Michael Bradley, Sebastian Giovinco and Jozy Altidore - against Montreal.
"The situation is difficult to cope with for big teams ... regarding the travel is difficult," Garde said. "It was probably difficult for them, but if they want to exchange their place in (the Champions League) ... I'll accept it.
"It's a problem for big teams, but they have a deep squad. They had a good game today as well. I'm only the Montreal coach."
Impact's Mike Petrasso (24) challenges Toronto FC midfielder Nicolas Hasler in Montreal on Saturday, March 17, 2018.
Utilizing a 3-5-2 formation from back to front, the Impact proved to be compact defensively. Fanni, the 36-year-old French veteran, certainly showed he deserves to continue remaining in the starting formation.
"I'm pleased but not really surprised," Garde said. "I asked a lot of questions to a lot of people in France. When you see a player still playing at 36, not having so much big injuries in his career, you can guess he's a pretty good professional. He loves the game and is very passionate.
"I needed him today."
The game was spirited and chippy, the work of referee Robert Sibiga dubious at best. Garde was particularly animated on numerous occasions as he attempts to understand North American officiating, but was loath to complain too profusely to the media.
"When you live the game live, there's passion on the field, especially on my bench. I know that," he admitted. "But I don't want to speak too much about the refereeing today."
There certainly were some anxious moments for both Garde and his players late in the game, the visitors pressing for the tying goal.
Impact goalkeeper Evan Bush got a piece of an Altidore shot in the 84th minute, but had to rely on Petrasso clearing the ball away as it rolled toward the empty net. Three minutes later Bradley, from distance, was just wide.
Montreal, of course, was guilty of surrendering late leads a year ago.
"There wasn't really concern. There was a sense of calmness in a lot of those moments," Bush said. "That's what you need to close out those types of games. Last year we kind of fell flat at the end of games because of our fitness levels. That's not the case this year.
"To be fair, we were creating chances until the end, too."
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com( mailto:hzurkowsky@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1( http://twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1 )
Related
Impact get it done the hard way against weary Toronto FC( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/impact-get-it-done-the-hard-way-against-weary-toronto-fc )
Impact hope home field is tonic to notch first win in Big O opener( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/soccer/mls/montreal-impact/impact-hope-home-field-is-tonic-to-notch-first-win-in-big-o-opener )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

