There may be little in the way of sunshine in the forecast for the next 48 hours, but Montrealers will still be feeling the heat.
Environment Canada reinstated a heat warning for the Montreal area early Tuesday, noting that the "warm and humid airmass covering Southern Quebec today will persist through Wednesday evening. The temperatures combined with the humidity will produce humidex values of 35 to 38 degrees Celsius. Moreover, minimum temperatures will remain above 20 degrees overnight tonight."
The warning notes that the excessive heat represents potential health risks for young children, pregnant women, older adults, people with chronic illnesses and people working or exercising outdoors.
David Kaiser, a physician with Santé Montréal, said the city's public health agencies go into what they call "active watch" mode when Environment Canada issues a heat warning. Current weather conditions do not meet the city's threshold for a heat wave, but the public health department is still issuing messages about prevention and reviewing health data daily to make sure they don't see abnormal rates of hospital visits, deaths and other indicators.
"It's a little stepped up from a regular summer day, but because we don't expect, from a public health perspective, that there are going to be population-level impacts, we're not in intervention phase," Kaiser said. An intervention phase involves first responders and health professionals knocking on people's doors to check on them and moving people to air-conditioned facilities, among other measures.
The city of Montreal is in the intervention phase when there are at least three consecutive days of 33 C or more during the day and the temperature doesn't go below 20 C at night, Kaiser said.
The most important thing Montrealers can do during heat like this week's, Kaiser said, is check on vulnerable neighbours and members of their community. Elderly people and people with chronic diseases are at a higher risk of suffering from the heat, becoming dehydrated and ending up in hospital and possibly dying.
"The way to protect those people on all of the hot days in the summer is really social solidarity. It's making sure that those people have someone who checks on them, if they're not mobile, if they have difficulty getting around, that there's somebody who can help them," Kaiser said, adding that even offering cold towels or helping people spend some time in a cool place can make a difference.
The forecast for Tuesday calls for showers and the risk of a thunderstorm in the evening and a high of 28 C with a humidex of 36 C.
Related
Heat-related death toll could get much higher( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-wave-death-toll-reaches-53-in-montreal-but-could-get-higher )
CREDIT: Darya Marchenkova

