Ignatieff wins first ballot; Stéphane Dion makes surprise move to third place
? Front-runner Michael Ignatieff won on the first ballot but fell short of the crucial 30-per-cent mark and Stéphane Dion squeaked past Gerard Kennedy for third place in first-round voting for the Liberal leadership.
The results will likely only amplify the sentiment that Mr. Ignatieff has little room for growth: his support on the first tally stayed flat, when front-runners normally win stronger backing from party officials. His tally didn't stray much from the level he achieved after the selection of elected delegates two months ago.
Bob Rae remained in second with 20.3 per cent, also identical to his expected support going in.
Perhaps the biggest surprise after the first ballot was that fourth-place Mr. Dion had jumped over Mr. Kennedy to take third place, by the tightest of margins. Mr. Dion won 856 delegates of the 4,815 delegates who voted, or 17.8 per cent - just two votes ahead of Mr. Kennedy.
Ken Dryden finished fifth, and as expected, far below the top four contenders, with 238 delegates, or 4.9 per cent. Scott Brison won 192 delegates, or 4 per cent.
Martha Hall Findlay was last, with 130 delegates, or 2.7 per cent - and so will fall off the ballot before the second round of voting Saturday.
That means six contenders, at most, will contest the second ballot. But there was wide spread speculation after midnight that Mr. Brison would also pull out.
The night was still a good for Mr. Rae, who won the first endorsement from a withdrawing candidate when Toronto MP Joe Volpe pulled out just after the first round of voting finished. Mr. Volpe won 156 votes, or 3.2 per cent of the delegates for the first ballot.
That gives him a whiff of momentum - although it was not clear how much, as Mr. Volpe's campaign manager, Nick Discepola, immediately went to Mr. Ignatieff.
But it was also a good night for Mr. Rae because all of his opponents all had something go wrong.
Mr. Ignatieff only just managed to hold together his existing level of support - and even his own campaign advisers had been predicting he would tally two or three percentage points higher. There have long been doubts about whether Mr. Ignatieff can gain support from other camps when the balloting continues Saturday.
In the crucial race for third, Mr. Dion surprised by passing Mr. Kennedy so quickly - but it ended as a night of mixed blessings.
Mr. Dion's speech, viewed as a crucial test of political charisma he is thought to be lacking, was not rated by delegates as the crowd-rouser he needed to push him to a win. And Mr. Kennedy, now already dropping down the ballot, is likely to be seen as lacking the momentum he needs to build to victory.
Earlier, the candidates delivered their crucial final speeches that will weigh heavily on delegates who enter final balloting today. And then organizers for the campaigns scattered for a long night of courting delegates in Montreal's bars and hotels.
Mr. Ignatieff had just finished his presentation when Mr. Volpe began his march and ended in an embrace with Mr. Rae on the convention floor surrounded by a crush of photographers and reporters.
Mr. Volpe's aides said Friday night he decided to endorse Mr. Rae because of his foreign policy, particularly on Afghanistan. Mr. Volpe has long nursed bitterness for Mr. Ignatieff, which started in the spring when the front-runner commented that Mr. Volpe's fundraising scandals had hurt the party's reputation.
Mr. Rae's speech stood out for its style: he eschewed the podium and teleprompters, and strode the stage holding the microphone.
"The Liberal Party has succeeded because it has been able to find itself in the heartland of Canada and its values have always tried to reflect the values of Canadians," Mr. Rae said.
He stressed that foreign policy is as critical as domestic policy, and lauded former prime minister Jean Chrétien for keeping Canadian troops out of the U.S. invasion of Iraq - which his rival, Mr. Ignatieff, supported as a Harvard academic.
Mr. Ignatieff focused his speech on party unity and portrayed himself as a strong leader, with convictions and a bold style.
He painted a portrait of Canada as the world's leader in environmental sustainability and health care, a country where aboriginals live as equals with the majority population and young people have the biggest dreams and opportunities.
"We are Liberals of a new generation in a new century [and]tonight we have a choice to make," he said.
"Let us choose unity over division. Direction over drift. Courage over fear, and compassion over indifference."
He asked his party's delegates to "give me the chance to lead you. A chance to inspire. A chance to serve you. I will make you proud. I will give you victory."
Mr. Volpe's endorsement of Mr. Rae was the first movement at the convention, where rumours swirled about which bottom-tier candidates would throw their support to which camp.
Ms. Hall Findlay had met with all four of the leading contenders - Mr. Ignatieff, Mr. Rae, Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Dion - and all four offered to help her find a safe Toronto riding in which to launch a bid for Parliament.
After Mr. Volpe joined Mr. Rae on the floor he predicted that he would be able to deliver his supporters to Mr. Rae.
"I'm obviously very pleased," said Mr. Rae, noting that was also happy to win the backing of some of Mr. Volpe's supporters in caucus such as Massimo Pacetti and Wajid Khan.
Mr. Volpe's campaign suffered a scandal in the spring, when his campaign accepted 20 donations of $5,400 each from five current and former executives of drug-maker Apotex Inc., and their family members - including two donations from 11 year olds. Mr. Volpe said he would return the donations to those donors.
The speeches started nearly an hour behind schedule following a day of technical challenges and travel difficulties brought about by weather woes. But once the speeches were under way, the packed Palais des congrès was filled with the cheers of raucous supporters.
Mr. Kennedy, who was the third last candidate to speak, said the Liberal Party can win the next federal election only if it concentrates on policies that improve the lives of ordinary Canadians.
Evoking the memory of Pierre Trudeau, underscored by an introduction by the late prime minister's son, Justin, Mr. Kennedy did not wait long before raising his opposition to the motion recognizing the Québécois as a nation.
"This week, many Canadians were made to stop and think about our identity as a country. As Liberals, we've shared different points of view. But through it all, we've never questioned each other's love for our country or our belief in it," he said.
The former Ontario cabinet minister used his speech to cover a lot of bases. Much of it was delivered in French to counteract the criticism throughout the leadership campaign that his lack of fluency would handicap him in Quebec.
He used his status as an outsider to the federal scene to push for new accountability provisions for leaders and to pledge that he could unify the party after more than a decade of fractious rivalries.
Mr. Dion, who spoke before Mr. Kennedy, tore strips off the Conservative Party and the Bloc Québécois in his speech.
He promised to deliver an electoral program that is strong on social justice, economic development and environmental progress, saying it will allow the Liberal Party to win back the hearts of Canadians.
Mr. Dion started his speech by attacking Prime Minister Stephen Harper and the Conservative government's decision to "blindly" commit the Canadian Forces' in Afghanistan until 2009.
"Canada has a prime minister who thinks that the United States is not only our ally, but also our model," Mr. Dion said, accusing Mr. Harper of "mirroring" U.S. President George W. Bush.
Mr. Dion also took aim at the Bloc Québécois, saying Quebeckers can fulfill their aspirations in a united Canada. To win the leadership, Mr. Dion, who was in fourth place, needed to jump ahead of Mr. Kennedy on the second or third ballot. Mr. Dion's success is linked to his ability to convince delegates that he is more than a competent minister, and that he can actually be a leader with pan-Canadian appeal.
As he arrived at the convention for his speech, Mr. Dion was accompanied by former minister and ambassador Allan Rock, who praised Mr. Dion's abilities as a politician.
Mr. Dryden, who spoke before Mr. Dion, delivered a passionate speech full of hockey references that blasted the Conservatives for taking the country in a narrow and divisive direction.
The former Montreal Canadiens goaltender portrayed Mr. Harper as a prime minister who is taking the country further right than previous Tory governments.
"Cutting isn't a vision," he said, in a speech typical of his emotional style, complete with a few fist poundings on the podium.
"We're a good country. We have a conscience. We don't like the poor being poor."
Though Mr. Dryden insists he still has a shot at winning, his support is highly coveted by the front-runners. The entire convention gave him a standing ovation, and Mr. Dion started another midway through Mr. Dryden's speech.
Mr. Dryden has not offered any hints as to who he might support should he not win, and some of his delegates think he might even stay neutral.
Mr. Brison, who spoke before Mr. Dryden, said the Liberal Party should make the fight against global warming its foremost mission in the 21st century.
Mr. Brison said he was committed to making Canada a world leader in clean energy.
"Governments need to go green, and that means buying green, and building green," he said.
Mr. Brison, 39, is the youngest of the eight contenders in the race to replace Paul Martin. A former investment banker who started his first business renting mini-fridges at university, he also served as a senior minister in the Martin government.
In 2003, Mr. Brison ran for the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party. He crossed the floor to the Liberals after he came in last.
Friday, he criticized Mr. Harper's Conservatives for abandoning the Kyoto objectives on greenhouse gas reduction and said he supported a tax on carbon emissions, which could subsidize research.
In her speech, Ms. Hall Findlay played up her status as the only woman in the race, hoping to gather support from ex-officio delegates.
"We will be the political movement of the 21st century by being truly inclusive," she said. "Trust me, as a woman standing here before you, I know. We are not yet inclusive enough."
First-ballot voting at the Liberal leadership convention was delayed for more than hour Friday because of technical problems accrediting alternates for voting delegates, some of whom were battling freezing rain and sleet to get to Montreal.

