An intense prolonged heat wave could present big issues during the COVID-19 pandemic.
That's why Dr. Pierre Gosselin, a consulting physician with the Institut national de santé publique du Québec, feels that the best news about this week's heat wave is that it is only expected to last three days. Environment Canada issued a special weather statement for the Montreal area on Monday that foresees local temperatures taking a three-day soar starting on Tuesday.
In a phone interview Monday, Gosselin said a longer period of extreme temperatures could be highly problematic for a city like Montreal that is still grappling with the novel coronavirus crisis.
For a short heat wave, people should follow the usual public-health recommendations, said Gosselin. That means try to keep your home fresh and cool, keep the curtains closed during the day, and take cool showers and baths. Also don't walk in the sun between 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. if possible.
Gosselin noted that roughly 800,000 Montrealers do not have air conditioning at home. If there is a longer heat wave later in the summer, the city will have to take special measures, he said.
"There shouldn't be a problem (this week) since it's a relatively short heat wave," said Gosselin. "But if it's longer we will have to think about finding spaces to refresh people with COVID...There are neighbourhoods where the homes are older and could be very hot. So in conjunction with the city, we would have to find spaces."
He said public-health authorities are looking at different possibilities to house older people, including schools, empty cinemas, or even air-conditioned buses that could be set up in different neighbourhoods.
"So we could have a bus for COVID-positive people and another for people who don't have COVID," said Gosselin.
But if there is a longer heat wave this summer, it will certainly put added pressure on the staff at CHSLDs and private nursing homes.
"For sure during a heat wave like we had in Montreal in 2018, there's a lot of unknowns," said Gosselin. "It could be difficult given the shortage of personnel that we have right now in the CHSLDs and in the private nursing homes. It would be a problem just to get people hydrated and give them basic personal care. We are already having trouble doing that right now. So if come summer we have a big heat wave and we have to take even more care with elderly people, to hydrate them and give them baths, for sure there could be deaths, as there are during every heat wave. ... I think the biggest problem will be the fatigue of the personnel, who will want to take vacations."
bkelly@postmedia.com
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz
Related
'It's inhumane' that so few rooms in CHSLDs have air conditioning: patient advocate
'Very high temperatures' forecast for Montreal, Environment Canada warns
Here are 6 things to avoid doing during a heat wave
Montreal's seniors especially vulnerable during heat wave
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our daily live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for May 25 here.
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

