A coalition of 11 leading environmental organizations vowed Sunday to hold politicians' feet to the fire during the Quebec election campaign on issues from climate change to protection of forests, agricultural land and waterways.
"It's the first time we've done this collectively," said Steven Guilbeault, co-founder of the environmental organization Équiterre.
"By working together, we've covered a wide array of issues," Guilbeault said in an interview after a press conference by the coalition, which also includes the David Suzuki Foundation, WWF-Canada, Vivre en Ville, Greenpeace Canada, Nature Québec, SNAP Que?bec, Vélo Québec, Trajectoire, the Regroupement national des conseils régionaux de l'environnement du Québec and the Regroupement Vigilance Hydrocarbures Québec.
The coalition will press all parties in the Oct. 1 election to set bold environmental targets in the coming months. Its campaign( https://www.vireauvert.org/nos23demandes ), titled "Vire au vert" (Go green), consists of 23 demands. They include:
Prohibit increases in fossil fuel production
Promote energy-efficient buildings and use of electric vehicles
Implement a stormwater management policy and flood-prevention plans
Reduce GHG emissions in transportation by 50 per cent by 2030
Adopt a moratorium on rezoning agricultural land
Promote active and collective transportation
Tax sales of high fuel-consumption vehicles
Reduce pesticide use and encourage organic farming
Increase marine-protected areas in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and protect biodiversity and endangered species
Preserve mature forests
Guilbeault said 250,000 Quebecers support environmental groups and their votes could make a difference in some 23 ridings across the province.
The environmental crisis - from extreme weather events to the destruction of natural environments and loss of species - makes it urgent to act, he said.
"The situation is getting worse, not better. We need to act more decisively than we have before," he said.
Studies show that politicians usually respect about 70 to 75 per cent of the promises they make, so it's important to get candidates to commit to sustainable policies, he said.
The movement is non-partisan and does not support any particular parties or candidates, he said.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Marian Scott, Montreal Gazette