Environment Canada issued a weather warning for the Montreal area on Monday, calling for "significant rainfall," significantly higher temperatures in the region until Wednesday and the possibility of localized flooding.
The "special weather statement" for Montreal, Laval, Longueuil and the Châteauguay-La-Prairie area noted that southern Quebec will see "a significant warming trend," along with between 20 and 30 millimetres of rain between Montreal evening and Wednesday.
A warm front from the central United States that is tracking across the province will see temperatures gradually rise above 10 degrees on Wednesday, the warning said.
The rain combined with the run-off from the snowmelt could cause localized flooding, it said.
Visibility may be reduced at times in fog, especially on Tuesday night, the warning added.
While localized flooding could occur near small rivers, it won't lead to major flooding of homes on larger rivers such as Rivière des Prairies and the Ottawa River, said Alexandre Parent, a meteorologist from Environment Canada
"Last spring, we had several weeks of rainfall and warm temperatures that created the flooding (of homes)," he said.
"An event like this one (where we have) two or three days of warm temperatures could have some impacts near small rivers."
Following last spring's widespread flooding( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood ), officials who monitor river levels are paying close attention to the height of the rivers and the upcoming forecasts, Parent said.
In the West Island, the city of Dorval announced it was taking precautionary measures in preparation for the heavy rainfall, with city employees closely monitoring storm sewers in critical areas to ensure water drains properly.
The municipality also said gravel bags will be available, free of charge, to citizens in the critical areas. Dorval is providing a phone number on its website( https://www.ville.dorval.qc.ca/en/news/article/flooding-important-rainfall-expected-on-february-20-and-21 ) for residents to request sandbags, adding that each case will be analyzed to assess the level of importance and need.
In the town of Rigaud, where more than 300 homeowners were flooded last spring, a spokesperson said officials are not expecting the rainfall to cause flooding.
"The rain will remove the snow that's on the ice, but the ice on the river is still thick and the rain won't melt the ice," said Marie-Andrée Gagnon, a town spokesperson.
Officials will patrol the area near the Ottawa River, just in case. As it does every year, the town has ordered 15,000 sandbags in case the river bursts its banks. Gagnon said some basements in homes close to the river flood every spring and residents are used to the inconvenience.
Montreal experiences temperatures above 10 C in February about once every four years, Parent said. The record high for Feb. 21 is 14 C, which was recorded in 1981.
CREDIT: James Mennie, Montreal Gazette

