As Montreal emerges from piles of snow and ice, citizens venture out-of-doors to re-engage with city life. For many older adults winter means "house-bound": frigid temperatures, icy sidewalks and treacherous roads. Summers bring warmth, but also new perils. The July 2018 heat wave left 66 Montrealers dead, many of them older single men.
Age-friendly city policies - such as the 2018-2020 document "Montreal, a city reflective of seniors' needs" - outlines an ambitious and broad mandate to provide co-ordinated leadership. This municipal project is inspired by the World Health Organization's 2007 Age-Friendly City( https://www.who.int/ageing/publications/Global_age_friendly_cities_Guide_English.pdf ) initiative, an agenda that implicates all levels of government with conscious co-ordination and, most importantly, input from older people.
Four areas of action are identified: making Montreal a city of neighbourhoods on a human scale; fostering greater social cohesion; engaging citizens in their communities; and placing seniors at the heart of partnerships. Within each of these areas lurk the specific issues that touch the lives of older adults who live here, from concerns about safety to the need for affordable housing. However, there are often gaps between policy documents and the lived realities of older adults.
The challenges facing aging populations in Montreal are year-round, on-going and should concern us all. With a view to making meaningful progress, we are proud to be hosting B/OLD: Aging in our city( http://www.b-old.ca ), a two-day trilingual, (English, French, and Quebec Sign Language) public symposium May 16 and 17, accompanied by a two-week exhibition in Concordia University's 4TH SPACE( http://www.concordia.ca/about/next-generation/4th-space.html?utm_source=vanity&utm_campaign=4thspace ) (on view until May 24) that will inspire intergenerational exchanges on what it means to age in Montreal.
Implementing an Age-Friendly City agenda here is hampered by the fragmentation of power and responsibility between the City of Montreal and its boroughs. This fragmentation allows boroughs to develop programming specific to their constituents. Wonderful programs and age-friendly strategies such as the borough of St-Léonard's Age-Friendly Action Plan, which was informed through neighbourhood walks with local older adults, may be launched in one part of the island and not another.
These strategies - their successes and their failures - would benefit from being shared. The question, in the current context, is how.
One possibility is to establish an "aging office" within the municipal administration that is funded, properly staffed and sufficiently influential to ensure that all city departments integrate age-friendly considerations in their workflows. An older-adult advisory board - a parallel to the existing youth advisory board - is another possibility.
The Age-Friendly City approach and plans are intended to enhance the visibility of our aging population and their concerns. What is needed, in addition to on-going consultation with older citizens, are resources devoted to tangible and timely actions, such as making transit in Montreal fully accessible - again a part of the 2018-2020 plan.
Successfully implementing the Age-Friendly City agenda also demands greater support for those agencies and organizations - many staffed by local volunteers - who are in constant contact with the local population. Many of these groups have been hit by funding cutbacks, for many years, yet still provide invaluable support that often goes unrecognized.
We live in a world of good intentions when it comes to dealing with aging, but these alone are insufficient. Implementing an Age-Friendly City agenda requires deliberate co-ordination and collaboration between federal, provincial and municipal government, across boroughs and through different sectors of our society.
As we become old - and we all do - visionary, inclusive, bold thinking is required of us all. The Age-Friendly City agenda begins at home, wherever that place may be.
B/OLD: Aging in our city takes place May 16 and 17 at Concordia University, 1400 de Maisonneuve W. Admission to all programming is free. For more information, call Sasha Lipskaia at (438) 824-5081 or consult www.b-old.ca.( http://www.b-old.ca )
Kim Sawchuk is director, Ageing + Communication + Technologies( http://actproject.ca/ ) research project, based at Concordia; Meghan Joy is an assistant professor in the department of political science; and Shannon Hebblethwaite is director of engAGE: Centre for Research on Aging( http://www.concordia.ca/research/aging.html ) at Concordia.

