It's a tradition that has survived everything modern life and technology can throw at it: When summer rolls around, people reach for a book. Reading, it would seem, is the perfect activity for that very specific state in which heat-induced lassitude and mental engagement overlap. There's even a small sub-genre of books about reading books in the summer.
Here, then, are some suggestions for filling the seasonal reading need. There's no particular genre bias at play, the reasoning being that a good book is a good book no matter the weather. Included are a couple of titles already covered in this space but long enough ago that a friendly reminder won't go amiss, as well as a couple still unread by this reviewer but worthy of a flyer based on reputation. Most are available electronically, but as always this reviewer recommends the format that you won't mind seeing splashed with the occasional bit of water or lotion.
Adam Gopnik's( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/adam-gopnik-is-back-and-raging-against-the-habs-and-trump-machines ) A Thousand Small Sanities: The Moral Adventure of Liberalism (Basic Books, 249 pages, $36.50) arrives in what feels like the nick of time. A corrective has been needed for the slow but steady demonization of small-l liberalism and the traditions it embodies, and former Montrealer Gopnik has applied the rigour and wit familiar to fans of his New Yorker pieces and essay collections to the task. Early on, he nails what makes liberalism such a soft target for absolutists at both ends of the spectrum: "The world is an imperfect place, and liberals are imperfect actors within it." Focusing on major figures in the l-word's evolution - he's especially illuminating on John Stuart Mill and his critically undervalued wife, Harriet Taylor - Gopnik humanizes what could have been a dry polemic, and leaves crucial space for the thought that the pendulum may yet swing back from its current authoritarian-friendly position. "Liberalism," he writes, "is realistic about the huge task of remaking worlds. But it is romantic about the possibility of making marginally happier endings for as many as possible within this one."
Mark Abley's The Organist has a worth beyond its immense literary value.
Mark Abley's The Organist: Fugues, Fatherhood, and a Fragile Mind( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/books/books-mark-abley-pays-eloquent-tribute-to-his-complicated-father-in-the-organist ) (University of Regina Press, 312 pages, $24.95) has been echoing in this reviewer's head ever since first reading late last year. In the intervening months, it has achieved across-the-board critical raves and word-of-mouth success; this is one of those rare and heartening cases of a book and its ideal readership finding each other. At a time when unprecedented numbers of people are dealing with caring for their parents, and with grieving their loss, books like this memoir of the author's relationship with his musician father have a bona fide utility beyond their literary value. Abley is no sentimentalist: his often difficult father gets nothing like a free ride. But he ends up with an indelible testament to honesty being the best form of love and respect.
Self-portrait by Ebony Flowers.
Hot Comb by Ebony Flowers (Drawn & Quarterly, 180 pages, $24.95) charts one African-American woman's youth and coming of age through a series of short stories and vignettes, all having something to do with hair. Graphic lit is a form ideally suited to the story Hot Comb tells: Flowers is able to pack her frames with the kind of detail that brings a narrative fully alive, while her deceptively naive drawing style belies the psychological depth of her character portraits, pulling you in by stages until you feel yourself a participant in these women's travails.
Self-portrait by Julie Delporte.
Occupying a similar but different space in the comics Venn diagram is This Woman's Work by Julie Delporte (Drawn & Quarterly, 256 pages, $29.95). Named for the Kate Bush song, this impressionistic work is essentially a meditation on how women who create are faced with the reality that they will still be expected to do everything traditionally demanded of women as well. Delporte's chosen medium - her palette looks to this admittedly untrained eye to be drawn from a set of Laurentien coloured pencils - communicates both vulnerability and a guarded optimism, and her writing is razor-sharp.
Mikella Nicol is a master of millennial tension.
If it's true that the young inhabit their own world, then novels about urban youth can feel like dispatches from a foreign country even when they're set in your own neighbourhood. Mikella Nicol's Aphelia( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/making-the-scene-in-2019-quebec-artists-to-watch-this-year ) (Véhicule Press, 160 pages, $18.95, translated by Lesley Trites), a cause célèbre on its original 2017 French publication, follows the ups and downs - mostly downs - of a 20-something graveyard-shift worker at a call centre during a summer heat wave as she attempts to recover from the messy end of a volatile relationship. If you've found your views on millennials piqued and enriched by Geneviève Pettersen and Guillaume Morissette, Nicol looks like the natural next thing.
Also in the realm of potential crossover, Eric Dupont's Giller-shortlisted family epic Songs for the Cold of Heart (QC Fiction, 608 pages, $27.95) has some distance to go before its profile in English starts approaching its stature as a modern classic of Québécois literature. What better time than the dog days, then, to start catching up? Peter McCambridge's translation is eminently readable. There's really no reason to put it off any longer.
EQUALLY WORTHY
Young readers, and all seekers of comic relief, should investigate Elise Gravel's( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/arts/elise-gravels-childrens-books-never-talk-down-to-readers ) laugh-per-page The Worst Book Ever, a meta exercise in creating exactly what its title claims.
A trio of recent books across the crime and thriller spectrum - Ann Lambert's( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/arts/playwright-ann-lambert-shows-a-flair-for-newly-adopted-genre ) The Birds That Stay, Denis Coupal's Blindshot and Catherine McKenzie's( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/books/catherine-mckenzie-a-convincing-storyteller-in-court-and-on-the-page ) I'll Never Tell - evince a local tradition in rude health. Slightly outside that zone, but likely to appeal to the same readers, is Colleen Curran's( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/books/colleen-currans-new-novel-a-cottage-country-caper-with-a-difference ) uncategorizable cottage-country caper Out for Stars.
Former Montreal Gazette contributor Bindu Suresh makes her literary debut with 26 Knots, a set of "interlocking love stories" that also functions as an elliptic cross-Canada travelogue.
Sylvain Neuvel tweaks his customary sci-fi approach for the short but trenchant U.K.-set The Test, a cautionary tale of what the worst implications of Brexit may yet mean.
ianmcgillis2@gmail.com( mailto:ianmcgillis2@gmail.com )
Related
More from Ian McGillis( https://montrealgazette.com/author/ianmcg2 )

