Anne-Marie Giguère and Kassandra Brochu aren't the least bit happy to see the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic hitting their home province. Both women come from the local restaurant biz and say they feel sadness seeing their friends and colleagues in the resto scene once again having to close their doors.
But there's no denying this second lockdown, which includes closing all restaurants in Montreal for 28 days this month, could be good for their business. Giguère and Brochu started up Les Weekendeurs in March during the first lockdown and its unique spin on restaurant delivery was a big hit.
The company, which they co-own, works with seven happening eateries, many of which are located in Sud-Ouest borough, where they both live. The restaurants are Verdun Cambodian spot Les Street Monkeys, gay-village vegan resto Bistro Tendresse, funky taco-and-much-more outlet Grumman '78, pizza and pasta specialists Moleskine, tapas spot Mauvais Garçons, Lebanese themed Sumac, and French bistro Restaurant Wellington.
The twist with Les Weekendeurs is you can make your own menu, picking and choosing from any or all of the seven restaurants. They deliver all of the ingredients and you just put the finishing touches on the meal in your kitchen.
"It's a delivery service that brings the best of what Montreal restaurants have to offer but in a very new way, which is ready-to-cook at home," Giguère said in a phone interview Thursday. "So it's a very different equation than what we see with Uber Eats or DoorDash and all of that stuff. Hot food that you order and receive within the hour. Our service is much more based on sitting down around a table and having a nice meal with perhaps a few other people, at least when we're allowed to. It brings up the quality of the finished product. So you're not necessarily receiving a hot mess at your house (like with other delivery services)."
Giguère and Brochu met a few years ago at the Atwater Cocktail Club. Giguère was working in administration with the Groupe Barroco, which owns a bunch of restaurants and bars, including the Atwater Cocktail Club, and in fact she still works with them part-time. Brochu was a waitress.
They became friends and in the spring began talking about the notion of creating this upscale delivery service. It was partly because they had time on their hands. Brochu had been editing and writing for the website restomontreal.ca and had been laid off because of the pandemic. Giguère had gone from full-time to part-time at Barroco for the same reason. The idea was to come up with meals that were tastier than the usual delivery fare, that tasted like they were home-cooked but wouldn't require much work from the folks buying them.
"Take the example of Grumman," Brochu said in a separate phone interview. "They offer kits so you can make your own tacos. So you get all of the toppings that you need to put in the tacos. You'll just have to reheat, say, the meat and the tortillas. But you don't have to for example cut vegetables or anything else that takes a lot of preparation. The chefs have already done all the work for you. So you just need to put it all together and heat it up at home."
And you can mix and match dishes from different restaurants.
"So you can create your own meal using several different restaurants," Brochu said. "You can take a side from one restaurant and the main dish, say a piece of meat, from another one."
They deliver using the refrigerated trucks of Les Marchands, a local company that delivers hand-cut fancy ice to local restaurants and bars. That connection came easy given that Les Marchands is run by Giguère and Brochu's common-law partners!
Delivery takes place on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays. If you order before Monday at 5, you'll receive your meal Thursday; order before Tuesday at 5 and get it Friday; and before Wednesday at 5 to get it Saturday.
For more information, visit their website lesweekendeurs.ca
bkelly@postmedia.com
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz
Related
Life in lockdown: Everything from fish to coffee delivered to your door
Montreal book and record stores went online, but not all eager to reopen after lockdown



