She may not camp out like a keener, but SARAH HAMPSON knows how to do the Canadian Ski Marathon her way: with a fireplace and glass of cognac at the end
? I am no . That's what you're called when you choose to ski the entire distance of the Canadian Ski Marathon, an annual event in the Gatineau region of the Ottawa Valley that takes you over hill and dale and some pretty steep inclines that can just about kill you.
I have felt like a before -- those hardy folk who trapped furs in the 18th and 19th centuries. In fact, a friend of mine even called me one recently, but that was on a Saturday night when I was wearing a very cool fur-trimmed tapestry jacket that I had bought on Toronto's Queen Street West. Dressed in it, I figure I could mesmerize a grizzly.
Oops, I have strayed off course. Pardon me while I get back to the point, which is simple: I am not a keener, and only a keener would want to be a in the Canadian Ski Marathon. (In the category of , there is the gold and silver participant. The gold keeners ski the entire course carrying 10-kilogram backpacks, in which they have all their overnight equipment because they camp out for the night. The silver run the entire course, but don't sleep out under the stars.)
Me? I am more of a when on cross-country skis. In my mind, it is the least intrusive way to slip into snowy woods, silent and unnoticed. It's like making a perfect surgical incision into the magical cathedral of a forest. You can observe. Hear wind in the branches. Almost smell the snow's crispness.
And that's why I am writing, because the good news is there's a place for in the Canadian Ski Marathon, known, fondly, as the CSM to the 2,000 or so participants (ranging in age from 5 to 85) who come every year from all parts in mid-February. You can register as a "tourer," which means you can choose to ski only certain sections of the course (you can do as little as 10 kilometres or so on both days of the event). The only restriction is that you have to begin and end your course segments of choice while the checkpoints for those sections are still open.
The CSM is a marvel of organizational effort, thanks to a small staff and close to 600 volunteers. The course is well maintained. The checkpoints are stocked with healthy hot food, drink and ski wax, and include portable bathrooms. Local school buses ferry participants to and from other checkpoints and designated transportation hubs. (So, if you wimp out and only want to do one section, you can go back to your hotel or B & B for a little R & R.) Members of the Canadian Forces take up positions at various deep-in-the-trail points to hand out refreshments. (There's nothing quite like turning a corner in what feels like the middle of nowhere to find a man in uniform with a smile and a hot beverage warming on a Coleman stove.)
I had long wanted to go, if only to get a taste of an event that is billed as the world's largest and hardest cross-country ski marathon. Plus, it is one of those quintessentially Canadian Things To Do, like camping in Algonquin Park, smoking a DuMaurier while eating poutine and swigging a Molson, riding horses in the Rockies, or, even better, finding out if you can withstand the bilious ferry ride over to Newfoundland, which is something my father, a great man and an ardent Canadian, decided was a marvellous start to a family holiday when I was about 12.
Everything about the CSM is deeply Canadian. It takes place in the region of our capital city. French and English languages are in the air. And it was initiated in 1967 to mark the country's centennial. Don MacLeod, a former member of the Canadian National Ski Team, decided to celebrate the birth of the nation by leading 400 skiers across a beautiful landscape dotted with frozen lakes, clusters of maple trees, stretches of farmland, and bordered by the edges of the Canadian Shield. Measured in miles at the time, it was exactly 100 (for the centennial, get it?).
It's no wonder the tradition continued. The 160-kilometre course crosses mostly private land, so there's a lovely sense of permitted intrusion into other people's bits of heaven. Not that the keeners take too much notice of that. On the trail, the gold and silver clip along at an impressive speed, barely lifting their heads to take in the view. I felt like a reliable Toyota to their BMW.
Still, they have their own traditions, which are memorable. On the first day, my friend and I, along with my 15-year-old son, all of us keen to feel the vibe of the event, gathered at the starting point at about 7 a.m. in the freezing cold. Many families participate in the event: One quartet of two parents and two teenaged children outfitted themselves with tall, striped Cat-in-the-Hat head gear and big purple boxers worn over ski clothes. They flew over the trail, laughing and chatting.
For me, I loved the sense of community that the event created, even for the . On the school bus I took to get back to my B & B after completing a section that I considered a satisfactory 15-kilometre workout for the day, many of the travellers, strangers to one another for the most part, turned around in their seats to discuss the merits of the trail they had just skied, and which other sections they recommended. (The most treacherous section is No. 3, which starts at the bottom of the ski hill at Carling Lake and ends at the Rouge River. It has endless ups and downs, and can kill you, I hear.)
The camaraderie I experienced with my fellow skiers could be attributed to the mysterious school-bus effect, of course, which makes everyone feel like instant friends. But I felt it, too, in the morning over breakfast and at dinner in our small B & B in Montebello. It was also palpable at the optional closing buffet banquet for the event, which was well attended.
The other tradition I enjoyed was a cognac in front of the massive fireplaces at Chateau Montebello, a resort I think of as the Titanic of winter fun. As I swilled my drink in my bell-bottomed glass, I figured all those keeners were already fast asleep somewhere, either under the stars or in school auditoriums in Papineauville and Lachute, where organizers offer dormitory-style accommodation.
Call my version of the CSM The Wimpathon if you must -- but look who's sipping Courvoisier by a roaring fire.
Pack your skis
MEMORABLE MOMENT
Crossing a wide, frozen lake with no skiers in view. I felt wonderfully alone in the white landscape. SRESS FACTOR
Having to pee in an ancient outhouse near the trail. Lesson learned: Go before you ski.
CANADIAN SKI MARATHON
The 41st-annual CSM takes place Feb. 10 and 11: 1-877-770-6556; csm-mcs.com. The website offers information on trails, ski conditions and different categories of participation. The site also lists local B&Bs. Note: These accommodations book up fast. You can register to ski on the day, but for savings, it's easier to register on-line and there are discounts if you register early. (Online deadline for this year's event closed yesterday.)
Charter buses are also organized through the CSM from Montreal and Toronto. (After a full weekend of skiing, no one wants to drive five hours back to Toronto or two hours to Montreal on a Sunday night.)
WHERE TO STAY
Fairmont Le Chateau Montebello: Montebello, Que.; ; 819-423-6341. Offers a deluxe package for the CSM weekend. Prices are per adult and include Friday and Saturday accommodation, Friday dinner, Saturday breakfast, Saturday dinner and Sunday breakfast. One person is $650, two people, $445.

