Mi'kmaq director Barnaby hopes to create 'watershed zombie film'
"I've always operated on the idea that you need to wrap hard-to-swallow concepts in familiar tropes," said Jeff Barnaby.
The Montreal writer-director packed a lot into his last movie, the 2013 coming-of-age tale Rhymes for Young Ghouls. Set up as a heist film, starring then-newcomer Kawennáhere Devery Jacobs as a young Mi'kmaq girl out for revenge, Barnaby's debut feature commented on the residential school system, as well as the effects of incarceration, drug use and the broken family unit on Indigenous communities.
Barnaby chose the zombie genre as a framework for his second feature, Blood Quantum, because in his words, "Who doesn't love zombie films?"
Viewers can expect a "pretty hardcore zombie movie that deals with a lot of issues around miscegenation and multiculturalism," Barnaby said. "I wanted to tell a story about colonialism without actually showing individuals in fox skin and white people coming in on boats, so I came up with the concept of Natives being immune to a zombie plague."
A Mi'kmaq reserve becomes an asylum against the zombie threat in Blood Quantum, leading to a quandary as Indigenous inhabitants argue about whether to protect their non-Indigenous guests or let them fend for themselves.
At the centre of the drama are a young white woman (Degrassi's Olivia Scriven), who is pregnant, and her Indigenous boyfriend (Forrest Goodluck, seen in The Revenant).
Barnaby shot the film on a shoestring budget, due to funding challenges.
He hopes to create "a watershed zombie film, or at least open up the idea that Native people, people of colour and minorities in general can start tackling these old genres and bring a fresh perspective of our culture."
Montreal production company Prospector Films( https://www.prospectorfilms.com/bloodquantum/ ) is eyeing a fall release.
- T'Cha Dunlevy
Jeff Barnaby uses the zombie genre to frame Indigenous issues in Blood Quantum, because "who doesn't love zombie films?"
Pitre is Little Charming with a lot of talent
At 25, Westmount-raised Laurent Pitre still has the look of youthful innocence that helps him get away with playing Prince Charming's lesser-known little brother in his stage show Little Charming and its sequel Mid Knight. But he can also do hard-bitten, as he demonstrated in another self-penned show, A Perfect Picture, in which he played the war photographer who took the infamous snap of a vulture and a dying Sudanese child.
Eye-catching roles like these (his recent turns in Urban Tales at Centaur and Oren Safdie's Gratitude at MainLine were also real treats) have made a breakthrough into the mainstream an inevitability.
"I seem to have been 'emerging' for a long time," Pitre said. "2019 looks like the first time I'll be really hitting it off on the professional stage."
Pitre was talking about his role in The Shoplifters, a comedy crime caper written by Morris Panych, who will also be directing when it plays at Centaur in March.
Yet francophone audiences have already had a glimpse of Pitre in a major professional role, in Annie Baker's Les flâneurs célestes (The Aliens), which played at Théâtre Prospero in 2014.
"I was very blessed to have come straight out of theatre school (at Dawson) and got a role in that production," Pitre said. "It went on to play sold-out houses at La Licorne. I got my first agent out of that."
Pitre is returning to francophone theatre in February, when he will play in a new piece called Hâgar et la source at Agora de la danse's space in the Wilder Building. Meanwhile, he's also been working on a screenplay.
"Basically, the protagonist is a guy who dresses as a traffic cone and fights crime," he explained. "He's called Cone Man. It's a very Montreal story."
- Jim Burke
Laurent Pitre in Mid Knight: from youthful innocence to hard-bitten roles.
Stay Tuned for second part of La Voix semifinalist Fils-Aimé's trilogy
Dominique Fils-Aimé may not be a household name, but she garnered plenty of buzz with the release of her second album, Nameless, last February. And it looks like the heat around this Montreal artist is set to be upped a few notches with the launch of Stay Tuned! on Feb. 22.
Nameless and Stay Tuned! are the first two instalments in a trilogy of albums focused on the history of women, music and African-Americans over the past two centuries. Nameless was inspired by the Maya Angelou poem Still I Rise and was steeped in the blues songs of the first half of the 20th century. The new album is inspired by the arrival of jazz in the U.S., though both collections mix soul, jazz and blues, all built around Fils-Aimé's evocative voice.
"People have called it neo-soul, blues tinted with R&B," she said. "People put so many labels, and I love that, because we're at a point where there are no longer any boxes. Things can mix more than ever. It's rare that we have someone who is purely in one single genre."
Growing up in a family headed by Haitian parents, Fils-Aimé mostly looked to black American music for inspiration. But she only started singing seriously at 17. She went to the semifinals in the TVA hit La Voix( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/english-montrealers-have-a-voice-on-la-voix ) four years ago, but says she feels her real musical self is reflected much more on her albums than on La Voix, and now "music is the real healer" for her.
Fils-Aimé played two dates at the small M2 room in MTelus during the jazz festival last summer, and is set to play L'Astral as part of Montréal en lumière on March 1.
- Brendan Kelly
Singer Dominique Fils-Aime goes beyond genres.
Whalen's dark humour is served up with a smile
It's been quite the ride for standup Shirley Whalen, but she has hit her stride in Montreal.
Whalen was born in Fort McMurray, Alta., and was based in Toronto for a spell, but made her mark on the Montreal alt-comedy scene soon after moving to these parts. Recently, she did a CBC-TV taping at the Winnipeg Comedy Festival and was the only Montreal-based wit to make it to the semifinals of the 2018 Canadian SiriusXM Top Comic challenge.
Whalen, 29, admits she didn't leave Toronto to advance her comedy career here: "Things were going well for me. No, I came for a boy I love." That boy-man would be comic Troy Stark.
Whalen is nothing if not humble. "The comedy scene is smaller here than in Toronto, so it's easier to stand out, although audiences here seem to appreciate the arts much more and love to laugh. But the real plus is that my lifestyle outside comedy is just so much better here."
Funny also helps. Ever self-deprecating, Whalen - whose mom is renowned opera soprano Laura Whalen, but who has no such singing ability herself - loves "to address subjects women are usually uncomfortable to talk about but subjects tailored to women."
She plays heavily on her slight body frame: "I like to say there's less of me to love. But skinny has become almost a derogatory word used against me. Girls come up to me all the time and say they hate me for being so skinny. Still, I would probably be thrown into jail for ever telling a girl that I hated her because she was too fat." Pause. "But at least I would be able to slip through the prison bars and escape, because I am so skinny."
What makes Whalen's comedy so appealing is that she always delivers her brand of darkish humour with a disarming smile. "A friend of mine describes it as twisted optimism."
- Bill Brownstein
Shirley Whalen reels us in with "twisted optimism."
Esplanade's track record makes Nicol a good bet
In the literary world, you don't always see the next thing coming. Even if you're among the select circle given to combing publishers' catalogues and quarterly magazines, predicting who might rise from the vast pool of hopefuls can feel like a fool's errand. So it's nice to have a marker or two to help make it all a little less random. Véhicule Press's Esplanade Fiction imprint, currently under the stewardship of Dimitri Nasrallah, is one such standard-bearer.
As in the old days when you'd buy a record on faith if it bore the Rough Trade or Factory seal, the Esplanade brand has earned readers' loyalty. Among the alumni are Anita Anand, Guillaume Morissette, Geneviève Pettersen, Josip Novakovich and, indeed, Nasrallah himself. This spring their ranks will be joined by 26-year-old Montrealer Mikella Nicol, who makes her English-language debut with Aphelia, a translation of her second novel, 2017's Aphélie.
Author Mikella Nicol makes her English-language debut with Aphelia.
The basic setup - a 20-something graveyard-shift worker at a call centre during a summer heat wave is on the rebound from a volatile relationship - already includes at least four elements rife with dramatic portent. The catalogue description includes words like "brooding," "millennial" and "ennui," so as a novel of urban youth, this one sounds both timeless and bang up to date.
Its April publication is part of a bigger and heartening development whereby French-language causes célèbres are being rendered in English in less time than we'd been used to. In this case, that assignment went to fiction writer, poet and Montreal Review of Books editor Lesley Trites, indicative of another trend that sees name writers of both languages translating their fellow writers' work.
- Ian McGillis
Related
The Quebec arts stories that defined 2018 for our writers( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/the-quebec-arts-stories-that-defined-2018-for-our-writers )
Step through the looking glass to 2018 Year in Review( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/2018-year-in-review )

