Digital imaging specialistPhotoChannel Networks Inc.says it has made major progress on the management reorganization announced March 19, including a 50-per-cent reduction in its staff. "We have eliminated or re-tasked all aspects of the company ...
Digital imaging specialist PhotoChannel Networks Inc. says it has made major progress on the management reorganization announced March 19, including a 50-per-cent reduction in its staff. "We have eliminated or re-tasked all aspects of the company to allow all resources to be committed to implementing The PhotoChannel Network," Peter Scarth, PhotoChannel's chairman and chief executive officer, said in a statement. "We continue to negotiate with key photo retailers and strategic partners." The company said it has negotiated a bridge loan from senior management and prominent shareholders to help it meet short-term financial obligations. It added that further financing is necessary in order to meet its long-term obligations, although it has discontinued the $3-million debenture offering announced Feb. 9. The PhotoChannel Network is a global and secure digital imaging network linking consumers directly, or through syndicated sites at retailers, on-line portals and communities, to the retail members of The PhotoChannel Network who operate digital minilabs and digital photo kiosks.
AT&T Canada has opened an Internet data centre in Montreal, it's third in Canada. The centre provides a secure facility for hosting business Web sites and server operations, or for setting up operations for application service providers (ASPs), the company said. The facility is a carrier-class data centre with full environmental controls, uninterruptible power, back-up diesel generators, controlled access, video surveillance, multiple broadband fibre ring access, raised floors with anti-static tiles, two-stage, zoned fire/smoke/heat protection, high-speed Internet connectivity and full-time monitoring. The Internet Data Centre's services are aimed at small to large businesses that have high bandwidth requirements for e-business.
Kodak has returned to the CMOS-based image-sensor technology to produce a camera that offers digital video, MP3 and VGA-quality still images. The CMOS sensor, which requires much less power to run than the CCD sensor, is powers by three AAA-size batteries. The Kodak mc3 captures pictures in 640 x 480 (VGA) resolution, about 150 of which can be stored on the included 16 MB CompactFlash memory card. Or it can record five minutes of digital video in QuickTime format at the rate of 10 frames per second, or one minute of video at 20 frames per second. Or it can store up to 20 minutes of digital music on the included 16 MB CompactFlash memory card (a microphone and speaker are built into the camera). The mc3 is to be released in Canada in April, at a retail cost of $359.
Smaller is better for office computers, Hewlett Packard believes, and so has introduced the low-maintenance e-PC, a "re-invented desktop PC." The sealed-box HP e-PC is about the size of a large reference book (8.9 by 24.0 by 27.2 centimetres) and weighs only 3.5 kilograms, and is designed to fit into any office environment. Its smaller size also means that the system is much quieter. The modular design, which includes a hard-disk drive, a system chassis and a power supply, decreases the failure risk by 25 per cent, lowering service charges HP says. The e-PC comes with either a Pentium III 866 MHz or a Celeron 633 MHz processor, 64, 128, 256 or 512 MB SDRAM, 10 GB or 20 GB hard disk , fast Etherlink connection, CD drive, Cirrus Logic sound card and either Windows 98 SE or Windows 2000 Professional.
Montreal-based Matrox Graphics announced on Thursday the release of the Millennium G450 PCI i, a version of its Millennium G450 AGP graphics card made for older computers whose motherboards are not equipped with accelerated graphics port (AGP) slots. The G450 PCI features Matrox's DualHead technology, which allows two monitors to be run off one computer, to these older machines and laptops with PCI docking stations. The DualHead technology allows end users to select eight possible display combinations and five operational modes without having to upgrade the motherboard. The Millennium G450 PCI will be available at the Matrox Store (www.shopmatrox.com) and sell for $115 (U.S.).
Front Logic Inc. of Saskatoon has unveiled a monolithic digital selection and delivery system called the Mstation M1 Kiosk, which it has unveiled at Canadian Music Week at the Westin Harbour Castle hotel in Toronto. The Mstation distributes entertainment media electronically, reincarnating it into a physical format on demand. As a freestanding kiosk made of stainless steel and molded rubber, it is capable of delivering a product range that encompasses music, software, information, and movies. It uses an acoustic-wave sensing touch screen interface, which uses phonetic encoding to return relevant search results.
A Comedy Network special called That Canadian Guy by Glen Foster , a 20-year veteran of stand-up comedy, was so successful in its attack on Canadian style that Foster has created a Web site dedicated to his brand of humour. "People will stop me in the street and say, 'You're That Canadian Guy!' I always answer, 'That's not really my name. ... It's That Canadian Guy Dot Com." After mentioning his Web site in the TV special, the site was inundated with thousands of hits and hundreds of e-mails, and the network announced plans to rerun the show April 1.
While most U.S.-based manufacturers leave it up to their Canadian customers to retrieve their on-line purchases from the Canada Customs offices, Cambridge SoundWorks has set up an easier solution. The U.S.-based audio and video manufacturer and subsidiary of Creative Technology Ltd., makers of the Sound Blaster sound cards and other products, has resolved its cross-border issues on with a program called Borderfree, running on www.hifi.com, a shopping service that calculates Canadian prices, taxes and shipping and handling costs.
Hewlett-Packard announced a new line of products at the CeBIT computer show in Hamburg, Germany, on Tuesday, mostly for mobile consumers. Offerings include: an entry-level version of its handheld computer, the Jornada 525, an innovative accessory that allows a Jornada Pocket PC to perform like a point-and-shoot digital camera, scanners with improved speed and image quality and other accessories that enable wireless communication between devices that support the Bluetooth standard.
Mynix Technologies of Toronto has announced the MyPAQ, which it calls "the world's smallest PC." The new MyPAQ Pocket Size PC includes the central processing unit, RAM, hard-disk drive, modem, motherboard and connectors and it all fits into a box measuring 146 by 126 by 25 millimetres in size and weighing less than one kilogram, about the size of a slim hardcover novel. It is meant to be connected to a standard keyboard and monitor both at home and at work, so the user can carry the computer with its personalized system with him at all times without the need to pay for the high price of notebook computers.
Lexmark Canada Inc. has introduced the Lexmark J110 color printer, which employs a unique combination of colour, laser speed and quality with a low price tag. Using technology the company calls LiquidLaser, a combination of inkjet (four separate ink tanks) and laser printing, the J110 is a business-class, workgroup colour printer that will retail ($1,349 Canadian) at half the price of comparable colour lasers. Its speed is comparable - up to 16 pages per minute in black and white, and up to 10 pages per minute in colour. In draft mode, colour printing speed can reach 14 pages per minute. It is said to be robust enough to handle up to 10,000 pages per month.
SIGPRO Wireless Inc. of Ottawa has signed an agreement with WIPRO Technologies of India to accelerate the development of SIGPRO's Centium superchip for wireless personal communication devices. WIPRO will provide software and design expertise to complement SIGPRO's chip design. The programmable superchip is aimed to drive third- and fourth-generation wireless personal communication devices capable of supporting a multitude of applications including communication, computation (palm computers), information (e-mail and Web access) and navigation.
Fujifilm Canada has introduced two new models in its digital still-camera line, the Porsche-designed FinePix 6800 Zoom and the FinePix 4800 Zoom. The FinePix 6800 Zoom is equipped with a new Fujifilm Super CCD sensor and image processors. The new cameras allow users to attach 30-second voice notes to each picture and create business trip-travelogues or narrated family albums. The cameras also can be used as PC-cams for videoconferencing, or family communications. Each can record up to three minutes of AVI video at 10 frames per second, with audio recording capabilities for dictation. The cameras are products of F.A. Porsche Design, which designed the German sports car. The FinePix 6800 Zoom will be available in May at a retail price of $1,300 (Canadian) and the FinePix 4800 Zoom will be available in late June at a retail price of $1,000.

