Montreal's morning rush hour was slowed but not snarled Thursday as a major low pressure system( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-and-ice-and-nothing-is-nice-in-montreal-weather-warning ) packing a double-barrelled dose of rain and snow tightened its grip on the city and the province.
While on-island and most Laval school boards remained in operation, those north of Laval were announcing closures due to a heavy overnight snowfall.
Montreal's Trudeau airport was also feeling the effects of the weather system, which is expected sweep east across much of the province by Friday. While most scheduled departures were able to take off Thursday morning, nearly every arrival between 7:30 a.m. and 10 a.m. had been cancelled, delayed or seen its ETA revised.
The storm system is expected to dump up to 45 centimetres in certain regions of the province, according to Environment Canada. And high winds are expected to sweep the Montreal area in time for the afternoon commute.
The storm system, which originated in the American southwest, will bring a mix of rain and snow as well as strong wind gusts expected to hit 70 km/h in Montreal by Thursday afternoon.
The fact the system's fallout was striking harder north of the Saint Lawrence was evidenced mid-morning by power failures( https://poweroutages.hydroquebec.com/poweroutages/service-interruption-report/index.html#bis ) in the Laurentians, Outaouais and Lanaudière regions that left more than 10,000 customers without electricity.
The Montreal area is expected to receive 10 to 15 centimetres of snow( https://montrealgazette.com/news/blizzard-proof-a-spadeful-of-tips-for-safe-snow-shovelling ), which started to fall as rain overnight and continued to do so through the morning.
Environment Canada meteorologist André Cantin said conditions created by the system are expected to be "particularly difficult Thursday morning in the Outaouais, the north of Montreal, Lanaudière, then move toward Trois-Rivières and Quebec City later in the morning."
Twenty-five to 45 centimetres of snow are expected to fall in the Laurentians, Lanaudière, the Mauricie region, Quebec City and the Côte-Nord, Bas-Saint-Laurent and Gaspé regions.
Whiteouts caused by the high winds are also expected to reduce visibility on highways along the St. Lawrence River, particularly in the Chaudière-Appalaches region.
Other road closures could be added( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang ) should the ministry receive information from motorists reporting deteriorating conditions via the Quebec 511 website.( https://www.quebec511.info/en/Default.aspx )
The system's impact will be less intense in the areas of Sherbrooke, Victoriaville, Lac-Mégantic, Sorel-Tracy, Drummondville and Thetford Mines, with rain and a little snow on Thursday afternoon.
Related
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )

