Ontario, Quebec and the Maritimes see snow and below-zero temperatures replace the balmy weather they had been enjoying
? Ski season is saved. Quebec City's ice hotel might stay frozen. Montreal's Fête des neiges will be worthy of the name. Ottawa's Rideau Canal finally has a thin layer of ice to build on.
Toronto, well, enjoy the slush.
Winter finally arrived in full splendour in much of Eastern Canada on Tuesday, with more than 30 centimetres of fluffy snow in some places and temperatures well below zero - five days after a rainy Christmas Eve with temperatures in the teens that was more bewildering than pleasant for those who like some winter.
The snow fell across Eastern Ontario, southern Quebec and into the Maritimes. Newfoundland, one of the few eastern places that had decent snowfall before Christmas, was expected to see more flakes by the end of the week. As usual, flights were delayed and cancelled, cars slid off roads and people shovelled.
Before the break of dawn, Elvio Galasso and his son, Dante, had the car packed and were ready to roll to Mont-Saint-Bruno, the ski hill nearest to Montreal. "I promised him we were going no matter what," Mr. Galasso said. "It was a great day of skiing."
Mr. Galasso, a chef instructor at a Montreal culinary school, is among those not seduced by the weird December T-shirt weather fuelled by El Nino. "We need snow in Montreal for winter," he said. "It's who we are, we grew up with it. The streets are gloomy without it. Everything will light up now."
The view was more sombre in Southern Ontario. Toronto was hit by a "smorgasbord" of winter precipitation, from snow to freezing rain to ordinary drizzle that has made the city a slushy mess, Environment Canada senior climatologist David Phillips noted.
"You pick your poison," he said. "I often wonder who has it more miserable. Montreal has had 30 centimetres of snow ... but at least they're only dealing with the snow! Here what we've had in Southern Ontario is the buffet."
While many pined for a white Christmas when the weather was verging on tropical, the chilly morass of Toronto's streets has some ruing what they wished for. "We've gone from euphoria to ‘Oh no!'" Mr. Phillips said.
Bassel and Dina Ramadan fell victim to Toronto's fickle weather during a family visit from Tampa, Fla. They tried to go skating at Nathan Phillips Square on Monday but left because it was too busy. Returning on Tuesday, they found the rink closed and pockmarked with puddles.
Shrugging off their bad luck, the couple's son and daughter hurled soggy snowballs at each other. "If they're happy, we're happy," Mr. Ramadan said.
Winter clothing sellers are also reaping the harvest of the city's meteorological misfortune. The Toronto shoe store Getoutside was packed with shoppers belatedly, if not begrudgingly, buying Sorels and Blundstones on Tuesday. "The day after the snowstorm, people come flooding in," Clive Gayle, a salesman, said.
In Quebec, the absence of snow and cold has hard economic consequences for a province where everything from Quebec City's Carnaval to the flow of maple syrup relies on a proper frozen winter.
Tiny Sainte-Anne-de-la-Pérade has waited anxiously for the local river to freeze for the annual eight-week tomcod ice-fishing extravaganza, which draws 100,000 visitors from the cities and brings in $5-million in activity.
The river was only 60-per-cent frozen on Tuesday and the season will likely be cut in half. "This isn't the first time freeze-up is late, but this year we were really scared," Steve Massicotte, the festival organizer, said.
While most of the country east of Manitoba waited for winter, it's been well installed to the west for some time.
Since November, Theresa Leinenweber, the economic development officer for the town of Kindersley in western Saskatchewan, has jogged in much worse weather than anything seen in Montreal or Toronto. Trying to add a little levity to winter's early onset, the local RCMP detachment sent out a rap version of a winter weather warning to drivers 35 days ago.
Like most hardy Prairie residents, Ms. Leinenweber is bemused at the shock that the normal onset of winter seems to provoke in the urban east every year.
"My brother from Ottawa was here. He packed his long johns because it was -15. Really?" Ms. Leinenweber said. "I go jogging in a -30 wind chill here, but I have my limits, too. After that I usually wuss out."
But even in winter-hardened Saskatchewan, Ms. Leinenweber said people have basked in (relatively) balmy temperatures for much of December, with the occasional snowfall to keep things bright.
"I can't say I'm even that jealous of what they've been getting out east. These minus 10s here have actually been really nice," she said. It was actually -18 in Kindersley while she spoke.

