Bruce Dowbiggin on the statistical screed of Mike Gillis and Vancouver's relationship with the Canucks
Has Colin Campbell declared war on the nattering nabobs of negativity in the media? Since the NHL Director of Operations' tempestuous radio visit to TSN 1050 last week, refs have seemingly put away the whistles. Watching the Vancouver- Chicago game Tuesday night, the after-whistle punch, high stick or slew foot are suddenly a-okay again. Has Campbell declared a return to "let the players decide" hockey to vex his media antagonists?
Who knows what lurks in the minds of hockey men?
Canucks GM Mike Gillis had his opinions about Campbell's thoughts, but he wasn't suggesting any theories Monday as he employed the time-honoured media scum to rattle off a few statistics. Okay, he dropped an ad hominem or two in there, but mostly it was a statistical screed on how the ice has been tilted during their series with Chicago. It was left to Vancouver media to connect the dots to a tinfoil hat conspiracy. And whether the absence of calls against Vancouver in Game 7 proved Gillis' strategy had worked. Even though the Canucks were hit with a crucial penalty in overtime, most media thought the Canucks escaped being called for several more.
Hockey Mad: "Vancouver's a city gone mad."-- caller to Pratt & Taylor on TEAM 1040 Monday. Forget the drop-dead scenery, the fabulous restaurants, the mild weather -- Vancouver can make you crazy. Thanks to its melodramatic hockey team, Van City turned civic angst into an art form in the run-up to Tuesday's Game 7 against their Chicago nemeses.
Quite a statement about a town that rioted when the ‘Nucks were beaten in the 1994 finals. Where Leafs Nation, with all its neuroses, can at least summon up 11 previous Cups, Vancouver's loyalists have only the bitter herbs of forty years of failure. "Did I jump off the bandwagon?" asked another TEAM 1040 listener in the wake of the Canucks' 2-1 OT winner. "Of course I did."
Nothing charts the mood of a city better than sports talk radio, and Tuesday's mood was "pure panic," says TEAM 1040 afternoon host David Pratt. "I haven't seen our phone boards light up like this since the (Todd) Bertuzzi incident (in 2004). Tuesday was probably the biggest game for this city since 1994. If they'd lost it would have been the darkest day in Canuck history, going from 3-0 to Armageddon."
To explain the city's mishegas relationship with its team, Pratt says you must see the Canucks as Charlie Brown and everyone else in the NHL as Lucy, pulling the ball away at the last moment. "It's 40 years of getting their hearts ripped out," notes Pratt.
Throwing petrol on the auto-da-fe was Gillis‘s cri de coeur about the refereeing-- which recalled a similar performance from former Vancouver GM Brian Burke who coined the immortal line, "Sedin is not Swedish for punch me" in a Detroit series last decade. "When Burke did that in 2002, that was gamesmanship," Pratt says. "Mike Gillis had an argument, the discrepancy was real. So no, I don't think he was wring to get the fans worked up."
Omission/Commission: So how to explain the seeming discrepancy pointed out by Gillis? A recent book Scorecasting BY John Wertheim and Tobias Moscowitz suggests that what appears to fans to be an agenda of the league or its referees is, in fact, human nature at work. The authors say humans give the benefit to errors of omission over errors of commission-- i.e., refs swallowing the whistle rather than insinuating themselves into a close game. "People are rarely held to account failing to act, though those errors can be just as costly," writes Wertheim/Moscowitz.
Officials in every league subscribe to the physician's motto "Do no harm", thereby (subconsciously) keeping games close. So, umpires statistically call the 3-0 pitch a strike or an 0-2 pitch a ball. NBA refs make up for a casual foul by letting another go. And while NHL refs continue to call objective fouls (too many men, delay of game) they will allow John Scott punching Alex Burrows in the mush or Dave Bolland two-handing Henrik Sedin's stick in a critical situation. Penalty minutes per penalty also go down later in NHL games.
But, the authors say, this appearance of non-bias is a bias too. Pocketing the whistle is "a noble objective," write the authors. "But it expresses an unmistakable bias, and one could argue that it is worse than the normal, random mistakes referees make during a game." The Philadelphia Flyers of the 1970s played this omission/ commission card like a Les Paul, intimidating referees through a blizzard of fouls to not call one more.
Still, leagues reward officials who omit, not commit. "You might have a longer career as an official if you back off," NFL referee Mike Carey, one of the very best, is quoted as saying. "But you won't have a more accurate career."
Close Calls: TSN swings and missed Tuesday on how the Daniel Briere and Milan Lucic boarding penalties were different. Philly's Briere got just two minutes for what TSN's Pierre McGuire said was a "vicious" hit, while Boston's Lucic got five and a game for boarding Montreal's Jaroslav Spacek. (Briere later combined with Mike Richards, who escaped justice for a similar boarding in game five, on a goal to eliminate Buffalo.) Retired ref Kerry Fraser told the TSN audience that the hits were different but declined to show how or why. Fans went from befuddled to vexed while players keep trying to kill one another.
Speaking of referees, never understand the quick whistle when referee "loses sight of the puck". If puck is frozen it'll be frozen in a second, a minute, a week from now. Let the play continue. But the TV types buy into this bromide as if it's logic, like "I before E except after C". Like hand passes in defensive zone.
BTW: CBC at its very best in the booth Tuesday. Jim Hughson and Craig Simpson have already become the sine qua non, but they took their work to another level in the mind-bending tension of Game Seven Game 7 between Vancouver and Chicago. Hughson (mostly) curtailed his Canuck instincts while Simpson was level-headed and perceptive. Meanwhile, Bob Cole's church-organ pipes boomed in the Boston/ Montreal Game 6. Love how Cole drops the article to call them "Canadiens" the way Danny Gallivan once did. "Here come Canadiens to centre ice..."
Fill It Up With Premium: Optics are everything. When a judge lifted the NFL's lockout of its players, Miami Dolphins defensive back Will Allen arrived at team headquarters in his Bentley, garnering immense public sympathy for the plight of players in the labour dispute. Players also make a great fuss about avoiding an 18-game schedule, citing the rigours on their bodies, giving fans value for their money. Funny, players never make a peep about the league's fans paying full price for the four worthless exhibition games that most of them miss -- but which cost ticket holders full price.

