Mars has just buzzed the Earth, but don't despair if you missed the flyby early Tuesday morning.
The Red Planet hasn't been this close to us - a mere 54.6 million kilometres away - since 2003, and its orbit won't bring it this close again for another 15 years or so. You can still see Mars, but the trick is to get up before dawn and find a good view of the horizon - over the water or from high ground outside the city.
The "blood moon" eclipse seen from Siliguri on July 28, 2018. Mars is visible below the moon, closer to the horizon.
Mars will be the bright reddish star below the moon, near the horizon. It can be seen by the naked eye, but try looking with a good set of binoculars if you don't have a telescope handy. It's not going to be as big as the moon, so delete that spam email that promises it will be. NASA is in no mood for that: "The message is that Mars will look as big as the moon in our night sky. If that were true, we'd be in big trouble given the gravitational pulls on Earth, Mars and our moon!"
You won't be able to see them, especially because of a "planet-encircling dust event" going on right now, but there are two NASA rovers on Mars. Selfie-taking Curiosity, the best-known of the two, is drilling into the hard rock of the planet to find out whether small life forms called microbes could ever have lived on Mars. Curiosity is a long way from home, so take a minute to send it a postcard( https://mars.nasa.gov/msl/participate/postcard/ ) from the Mars Science Laboratory.
Fans of the Mars rover Curiosity can send it postcards via NASA's website.
Cousin Opportunity is also drilling - it's a robot geologist looking at the possible history of Mars, including what effect water might have had on the landscape. The rover is solar-powered, and the dust storm is making it difficult to recharge, so Opportunity is "putting herself to sleep only to wake when the skies eventually clear."
You'll be able to see Mars into the fall, but it will get smaller and smaller as its orbit takes it farther away from Earth. Mars's next close approach is Oct. 6, 2020.
Related
Stars Above: Summer offers best views of Mars in 15 years( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/stars-above-summer-offers-best-views-of-mars-in-15-years )
CREDIT: Hayley Juhl, Montreal Gazette

