Montreal is suspending the de-icing of encrusted sidewalks and streets so it can begin removing the 12 centimetres of snow that fell on Thursday.
Facing a barrage of complaints from slipping-and-sliding pedestrians and drivers, Mayor Valérie Plante said the city had hoped to focus on de-icing after it finished hauling away the 40 centimetres of snow that fell on Feb. 13( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/live-major-snowstorm-wallops-montreal-33-cm-so-far ).
Then it snowed again.
"Now I have to remove snow again tonight, which is fine - this is what a city has to deal with," Plante told reporters.
The latest snow-removal operation was set to begin at 7 p.m. Thursday.
Montreal has become a "punching bag" for people frustrated by snow and ice, Plante said. But many cities in the region also have sidewalks and roads in poor condition due to temperature swings and alternating snow and rain this winter, she added.
"I'm not trying to minimize the impact on Montrealers. I understand that they are frustrated if they leave their home and the sidewalk out front is icy. But people have to understand that most of the people who work on the snow are the same as those who work on the ice."
Plante said "everybody is doing their best and working really hard. And it's not like this year we cut the budget for snow. We're not trying to save money."
She added: "Of course some streets are not in the best condition because I need to manage with difficult weather conditions and human resources that I have to send here and there" to clear 10,000 kilometres of sidewalks and streets.
However, "the arterial network, the big arteries, both in terms of sidewalks and roads, I think generally they're in very, very good shape," Plante said.
City hall opposition leader Lionel Perez of Ensemble Montréal said "the root cause of much of the problem we're facing today" was the city's decision not to remove snow that fell in early December.
"It's inexcusable to have so many sidewalks that have so much ice on it," he said.
"We're not talking little patches. We've all experienced sidewalks that you literally can't walk on. People with limited mobility, the elderly, (are) literally being kept prisoners in their own homes and apartments."
He said "this is by far the worst winter in terms of icy sidewalks that people can ever remember," pointing to what he described as an unprecedented number of complaints on social media, including by some media personalities( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/a-week-after-snowstorm-icy-sidewalks-dog-montreal-mayor ).
Perez said Montreal should immediately launch a major operation involving "heavy equipment to break up the ice on the sidewalks to render them safe again. It's going to take a bit of time but they can't wait for the spring thaw. It's definitely going to require a special budget."
After a public uproar over icy sidewalks last year, the Plante administration made much of the purchase of "ice-crushers" - tractors fitted with metal rotors with spikes( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/ice-and-snow-montrealers-should-expect-better-services-plante-says ) - that can grind up ice on sidewalks and streets. The city bought 10 for $215,000 and has decided to rent another 10 for the winter.
Are they worth the money?
"I never said it would be a miracle solution but it's one of the solutions," Plante said, noting some boroughs are still learning how and when to use the devices.
"It's just one of the different tools that we have and it will not be the last tool that we come up with. The weather is changing, climate change is not going to stop, unfortunately - we need to improve and change our practices."
But Perez described the ice-crushers as little more than "a public-relations exercise."
"We had a difficult situation last year in terms of icy sidewalks and the mayor said we've been using this in Ville-Marie (borough) for the last year and they're great," he said.
But Perez said a closer look at the optimal conditions for the ice-crushers shows that they aren't as helpful as they initially seemed.
He noted they can only be used on ice that is between one inch and two inches thick and they work better on surfaces that don't have many variations. "If you have too many garage entrances, for example, that also hampers efficiency," Perez said.
"So unless you're dealing with some kind of trail in a park, they're not going to be used much on sidewalks. The proof is they haven't been used much this year."
ariga@postmedia.com( mailto:ariga@postmedia.com )
Related
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )
Montreal winter-driving guide: How to avoid sliding, sliding ... bang!( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang )
Blizzard proof! A spadeful of tips for safe snow shovelling( https://montrealgazette.com/news/blizzard-proof-a-spadeful-of-tips-for-safe-snow-shovelling )

