He was a Canadian track and field legend among master athletes who set countless world records when not needed by the Montreal police as a ringer
? Heading out for an early evening jog or trying to squeeze in a few holes of golf before the sun sets may not sound extraordinary. But when Ian Hume went for a run, he brought along a lightweight golf bag and a handful of golf clubs. Out on the links during the dying light of day, the course void of players, he would tee up, drive the ball, then race down the fairway toward his next shot. A gifted athlete, Mr. Hume celebrated his 66th birthday by playing 88 holes (he jogged through the final nine in an impressive 40 minutes and 41 strokes).
Mr. Hume's sporting career began in 1929 when, as a 15-year-old, he savoured his first taste of competition. For the next 70 years, he set countless track and field world records before retiring from competitive sport in 1999 at the ripe young age of 85.
He was a hero to writer and editor Todd Swift. "When I would say I was his grandson, people would nod, as if I had said Atticus Finch was. To meet him was to never forget him. He inspired you to be your best, in any walk of life."
Raised on a family farm in a village near Knowlton, Que., Mr. Hume's eccentricity manifested early. As a boy, he walked miles to school with a pet crow for an escort. Found injured, the bird had been nursed back to health by Ian's mother. It befriended young Ian and followed him through the treetops wherever he went. During school hours, the crow remained perched on a window sill until class was dismissed and then accompanied the boy back to the farm.
Much of Mr. Hume's development as an athlete can be traced back to farm life and its strenuous routines. When he wasn't throwing bales of hay around, he and his brother, Donald, would take turns leaping over them. His daughter, Margaret Swift, said her father believed that cultivating the land was the quintessential exercise. "He always thought that any good, hard work you did was the best for physical development."
With all that work, the brothers should have had little time for athletics. To compensate, they became exceedingly efficient and made time by racing through their responsibilities in order to play baseball before nightfall. The fact that they lacked equipment or a diamond to play on didn't deter them. Instead, they lathed their own bats from hickory and ash and transformed a patch of mowed hay into a field of dreams. By all accounts, his chores cannot have harmed his swing. A clutch player, he caught the eye of baseball scouts who signed him up to play with a Montreal Royals farm team.
An equally gifted scholar, he was only 15 when he enrolled at Bishop's University in Lennoxville, Que. At 5 foot 5, he was told he was too small to play on the school's basketball team. He returned a year later and was eagerly accepted as a star player. He had grown 12 inches.
After graduating, Mr. Hume began a career as a high- school Latin and mathematics teacher. Teaching in Fitch Bay in Quebec's Eastern Townships, he became infatuated with Melita Fraser, a fellow lecturer who taught 30 kilometres away in Beebee. Mr. Hume's courtship began during winter and, on one occasion, he skied through a blizzard of sleet and hail to be with her. His devotion and persistence so moved her that, in 1942, she agreed to marry him.
For all that, he never gave up his interest in athletics. He reputation in track and field was such that he became a ringer for the Montreal Police Department. Every summer, he would be hired as an instructor to help ready recruits for the Policemen's Athletic Association championship. To make Mr. Hume eligible for a competition that featured officers from all over the continent, he was made a member of the vice squad. His duties included the occasional ride in a squad car. From 1938 to 1950, he did the department proud, winning the overall individual championship 13 times.
A superb high jumper and javelin thrower, Mr. Hume was selected to Team Canada, at 40, to compete at the Commonwealth Games in 1954. Interestingly, the older he became, the more gold was heaped on him. In 1975, he returned to competition at the inaugural Association of Veteran Athletes world championship track and field meet in Toronto and, over the next 25 years, he set more than 40 world masters age records in nine events and won bundles of gold medals.
Along the way, Mr. Hume was made head official for track and field events at the 1976 Montreal Olympics. Earlier, in 1966, he had attended the Commonwealth Games in Jamaica as a Team Canada coach.
In 1981, Mr. Hume was named a member of the Order of Canada and, in 2002, was awarded the Queen's Golden Jubilee Medal for outstanding contribution to his community. He was inducted into the Canadian Amateur Hall of Fame in both the athlete and builder categories. But it was in 1982 that he achieved the apex of his fame when Today Magazine listed him as the 16th of the 115 best things about Canada.
Ian Knowlton Hume was born
on July 20, 1914, in Foster, Que.
He died in Saint-Lambert, Que.
on March 27, 2006. He was 91.
He is survived by his wife,
Melita, and by his children
Edward, Margaret, Heather,
Laurel and Vicki.

