No AC in patient rooms at Verdun General Hospital:( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/bring-your-own-fan-no-ac-in-patient-rooms-at-verdun-general-hospital )
In the midst of a record-breaking heat wave, patients on the upper floors of the Verdun General Hospital do not have access to air conditioning in their rooms or the halls just outside.
Patients who have been moved to beds on upper floors can be found sitting in the hallways in front of industrial fans or with damp cloths on their foreheads and necks. Buckets of melting ice sit outside patient rooms.
A spokesperson for Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux (CIUSSS), the government group that operates the hospital, confirmed there is no air conditioning in patient rooms in some of their centres. She continued that there are climate-controlled public spaces within the centres for patients and their visitors, though she was unable to specify where they could be found at the Verdun General Hospital.
Urgences-santé sees increase in 911 calls due to heatwave:( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/scalding-temperatures-take-toll-on-montrealers )
On the hottest day of the year, Urgences-santé said its crews were struggling to respond to an increased number of emergency calls in the Montreal area. The organization urged people on Monday to only call 911 in the case of a life-threatening emergency.
Spokesperson Benoit Garneau said people can dial 811 to contact Info-santé if they have non-urgent health problems. "If people are capable of standing, if they're conscious and alert and have minor problems, they shouldn't call 911," he said.
More than 1,200 people in the Montreal area called 911 on Sunday - approximately 200 more than usual. At least 30 of those calls were directly related to the heat.
Montreal police and firefighters were also busy Monday going door-to-door making sure the city's elderly weren't overburdened by the heat. According to the Montreal fire department, the city has a list of 55,000 addresses of people who are considered vulnerable during a heat wave.
Missing elderly Quebec couple found in N.B., 850 kilometres from home( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/missing-elderly-quebec-couple-found-in-n-b-850-kilometres-from-home ):
An elderly Quebec couple who had been missing since Saturday night were found late Sunday night in Rockport, N.B., almost 850 kilometres from home.
Irène Bolduc, 83, and Laurier Dupuis, 81, appeared to be confused, and police could not explain why they had strayed so far off course while driving home to St-Gédéon-de-Beauce, a region south of Quebec City.
The couple had attended a family reception in Shannon, near Quebec City, on Saturday but did not return home afterward. Family members contacted police on Sunday morning to report them missing.
They were found in their Dodge Caravan after Dupuis stopped in Rockport to ask a local resident for directions. The resident noticed the elderly man seemed confused and alerted the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The RCMP contacted the Sûreté du Québec, which identified the two seniors as the missing Quebec couple.
The SQ did not know why the couple wandered so far from home, other than to say they must have gotten lost.
Inmate escapes from Amos prison:( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/inmate-escapes-from-amos-prison )
The minister of public security confirmed Monday afternoon that a detainee at Amos prison escaped Sunday night.
Earlier in the day, Mathieu Lavoie, president of the union of Quebec correctional officers, said an inmate in a temporary modular building had escaped.
Police spokesman Louis-Philippe Bibeau said Dominic Houle, 38, was reported missing from the Amos facility around 8 a.m. Monday. According to Lavoie, Houle tricked guards into believing he was in bed, and he climbed the two fences that surround the prison.
Lavoie said Houle was in prison on accusations of fraud. He received a suspended sentence, which means he was serving part of his sentence in the community, but he violated the conditions of his sentence and was then incarcerated in Amos.
By mid-afternoon Monday, the Sûreté du Québec said no arrests had been made in connection with the escape.
With files from La Presse Canadienne
CREDIT: Jacob Dubé

