On Sept. 22 in Pointe-Claire, there will be a memorial service for a former member of the Quebec National Assembly, William (Bill) F. Shaw, who died May 26. Shaw's own election as MNA coincided with the electoral victory of the Parti Québécois in 1976. Those of us old enough to remember that momentous event will recall the very disquieting era it would usher in for anglophones.
I can appreciate that the PQ's victory was greeted with joy and pride of heritage for francophones citizens, or I can empathize with one of PQ minister Camille Laurin's stated goals of curing the Québécois's sense of "incompleteness" and "flawed identity" through his 1977 language law, Bill 101.
However, it was tragic that this restoration of pride, which should have been celebrated by all Quebecers, came to be such a perfect storm for the anglophones even if it had not been intended to be. Many had to endure family separations due to the emigration of friends and family. Those who stayed sometimes encountered professional discrimination.
Responding to the PQ language law became an unfolding ideological challenge. Elected in the West Island riding of Jacques-Cartier for the Union Nationale, Shaw would later leave that party to co-found the Freedom of Choice Party. Central to its raison d'être was the proposition that the language of business should be left to free markets and not complex government regulation. And children's educational choices should not be determined by who their parents were. Of course, most famous was his advocacy of Quebec's political partition as a choice for federalists in the event of a Yes vote for Quebec independence.
While one can agree or disagree with these arguments, in the context of Western democratic thought, was this truly an extreme position? His goal was never to encourage anglophone unilingualism. He favoured personal bilingualism and spoke better-than-average French for an anglophone of the day. And in his later life, he lived at home in both languages and was married to a francophone.
Nevertheless, concerns that his libertarian outlook on language was a non-starter with Quebec nationalists led many self-proclaimed anglophone "moderates" to quickly sacrifice this view of freedom on an altar of pragmatism, and concede that some restrictions on liberties, to accord francophones a sense of cultural security, may be justifiable.
Related
Dr. Bill Shaw, Quebec's unapologetic partitionist, dies at 85( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/dr-bill-shaw-quebecs-unapologetic-partitionist-dies-at-85 )
But whether sincere belief or Faustian bargain for later concessions, this strategy could not be entirely relied upon (for example, see the government-ignored 1992 Chambers Report, which requested that immigrant children from English-speaking countries be allowed to attend English schools).
It was as if a sort of fashionable groupthink had descended on our community that was almost as threatening to our sense of self as the legislative restrictions being imposed on us. Our link to our shared heritage with the rest of the English-speaking world, which at its most exemplary covets debate, diversity of views and political competition, seemed to loosen by the need to unite locally. And it is against this backdrop that Shaw's lasting legacy should be appreciated.
By running for office, he did more than speak out for the principle of freedom of choice in language-related public policy, he offered anglophones a democratic option by putting his name on a ballot. As a successful dentist, he didn't need to do it for money, and his efforts as an activist took his time away from his family, but he did it, nonetheless.
If his broader opposition to Bill 101 made him unreasonable, then perhaps we should view political change in light of acclaimed Irish polemicist George Bernard Shaw's aphorism: "The reasonable man adapts himself to the world: the unreasonable man persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore all progress depends on the unreasonable man."
The memorial for Bill Shaw takes place Saturday at 1 p.m. at Cedar Park United Church, 204 Lakeview Ave., Pointe-Claire.
Richard W. Smith is an educator who divides his time between Montreal and Yokohama, Japan. rwsmithgqm@yahoo.com( mailto:rwsmithgqm@yahoo.com )
CREDIT: Edie Austin, Montreal Gazette

