Almost 130,000 South Shore households were without power Sunday morning, mainly in Brossard, Longueuil and St-Lambert.
The cause of the outages was high winds that caused short circuits on power lines, said Louis-Olivier Batty, a spokesperson for Hydro-Québec.
In Granby, freezing rain also caused a major outage.
Hydro-Québec had some problems with its computer system, which was giving inaccurate numbers on outages on Sunday morning.
It will take Hydro crews a few hours to restore power on the South Shore because they must wait for the high winds to subside, Batty said.
Environment Canada had issued weather warnings Saturday forecasting freezing rain, turning to ice pellets overnight Saturday to Sunday.
That's what we got, but the switch to ice pellets happened sooner than expected, said meteorologist Simon Legault of Environment Canada.
That meant that streets, sidewalks and highways in Montreal were not as treacherous as feared, he said.
"It's less slippery this morning than what it could have been," Batty said.
The city of Montreal issued a statement Saturday saying it was closely monitoring weather conditions and would spread abrasives on streets and sidewalks as needed.
The less-than-expected amount of freezing rain that fell also decreased the risk of branches falling on power lines, Legault said.
While the South Shore was hit by major outages, widespread blackouts were averted in Montreal and Laval, he said.
"In the Montreal area, it's less impactful than what we expected," he said.
The ice pellets formed a layer on roads that some drivers said felt like driving on sand, over a thin layer of ice.
Transports Québec warned drivers to be wary of slippery conditions, especially on the South Shore and highways alongside the St. Lawrence River.
In the Quebec City area, where Highway 20 was closed between Lévis and Montmagny, conditions were snowy, with 30 centimetres' accumulation expected, of which 20 had fallen by 9 a.m.
Weather conditions continue to delay some flights at Trudeau Airport.
Environment Canada ended its freezing rain warning Sunday morning and is calling for snow until afternoon, with a couple of centimetres' accumulation. By the end of the month, the weather is expected to turn to more typical winter conditions, with bitterly cold temperatures and little precipitation, Legault said.
The cause of the outages was high winds that caused short circuits on power lines, said Louis-Olivier Batty, a spokesperson for Hydro-Québec.
In Granby, freezing rain also caused a major outage.
It will take Hydro crews a few hours to restore power on the South Shore because they must wait for the high winds to subside, Batty said.
Freezing rain turned to ice pellets sooner than expected during the night Saturday to Sunday, said meteorologist Simon Legault of Environment Canada.
The ice pellets formed a layer on roads that some drivers said felt like driving on sand, over a thin layer of ice.
Transports Québec warned drivers to be wary of slippery conditions, especially on the South Shore and on highways alongside the St. Lawrence River.
However, the switch from freezing rain to ice pellets meant that the risk of widespread power outages was averted in Montreal and Laval, Legault said.
In the Quebec City area, where Highway 20 was closed between Lévis and Montmagny, conditions were snowy, with 20 centimetres' accumulation.
Weather conditions caused delays in flights at Trudeau Airport.
Environment Canada ended its freezing rain warning Sunday morning and is calling for snow until afternoon. By the end of the week, conditions will turn to more typically cold winter weather, Legault said.

