Beaconsfield is known for its yacht clubs, two-car garages and quiet streets.
Leaf blower uprisings? Not so much.
But this normally tranquil bedroom community of Montreal made headlines well beyond its own tidy borders last week when police( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/police-called-to-quell-beaconsfield-leaf-blower-uprising ) were called to keep the peace at a raucous city council meeting.
Voices were raised, insults exchanged before council voted in favour of a bylaw( https://www.beaconsfield.ca/en/what-s-new ) to restrict the use of leaf blowers from June 1 till Sept. 30, beginning in 2019.
News of Beaconsfield's controversial leaf blower ban made national headlines, and Mayor Georges Bourelle later appeared on both CTV and TVA television networks to explain his city's decision to ban blowers during the summer months and what prompted tensions to flare.
"It's an embarrassment," Bourelle said of all the attention.
"We made Beaconsfield the laughing stock of the world, if I can say so."
The mayor said last Monday's council meeting was unruliest he's presided over since first being elected in 2013.
Bourelle said some in the crowd were openly hostile to the point of being physically intimidating.
"This was the most rowdy and the most disrespectful crowd ever," he said. "People even tried to block us trying to walk into the council chambers. There were people standing there who put up their elbows as we walked in."
With Montreal coping with an oppressive July heat wave, all hell broke loose during a heated question-and-answer period with citizens in the packed council chambers of city hall.
Bourelle said much of the dissent had been sown beforehand by disgruntled political opponents.
Of the 100 or so people who showed up to council, only about half were hostile to the leaf blower ban, he said.
"In a town of 20,000, 50 to 60 people is not representative of the majority."
While contractors voiced their concerns that a ban will force them to find other less effective means to clear away lawn debris, other critics were upset with the city's lack of transparency by not revealing the results of a local survey the city commissioned to help determine public sentiment on the issue.
The city argued the ban minimizes pollution and health risks.
Of 600 residents surveyed, the somewhat ambiguous results( https://www.beaconsfield.ca/images/stories/pdf/Greffe/leger_souffleurs_feuilles_beaconsfield_rapport_20180518.pdf ) show support for a partial ban, even though a majority were not bothered that much by leaf blowers to begin with.
(Some 45 per cent of residents surveyed owned leaf blowers).
While the answers might have been blowin' in the wind, Bourelle said the survey was intended for internal use and could be viewed on the city's website following the council vote.
But that did not sit well with some residents .
"There was a mob mentality," said Bourelle, who was called a "bully" for his handling of the ban.
Only once before has seen people so worked up over an issue in normally tranquil Beaconsfield.
"We once had an information session on public billboards that also got very heated," he said.
So billboards and leaf blowers are push-button issues in Beaconsfield?
Bourelle laughed and said: "It's most unfortunate. It's sad. I'm embarrassed to see a group give such a bad reputation to Beaconsfield."
But the mayor added: "What happened (July 9) does not reflect the real peaceful residents we have in Beaconsfield."
The next council meeting is set for Aug. 20.
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
Related
Police called to quell Beaconsfield leaf-blower uprising( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/police-called-to-quell-beaconsfield-leaf-blower-uprising )
Partial leaf-blower ban in Beaconsfield provokes cheers and jeers( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/partial-leaf-blower-ban-in-beaconsfield-provokes-cheers-and-jeers )
CREDIT: John Meagher, Montreal Gazette

