Gazette photo journalists take countless shots every year, from classrooms to cafés to crime scenes. What you see published in the paper is just a small sampling of their work. Here are some of their favourites from 2018 that never made it to publication.
Pierre Obendrauf: It's not all fun and games (but sometimes it is)
Oct. 10, 2018.
It took 35 years on staff at The Montreal Gazette for me to get the chance to cover an NBA game - a pre-season game at that. It was nice to cover something other than the Habs at the Bell Centre. Here, Brooklyn Nets guard D'Angelo Russell blows past Toronto Raptors guard Lorenzo Brown during the second half of the game in Montreal.
Sept. 25, 2018
On a typical rainy day in September, I was waiting in my car for a photo subject to arrive for a shoot. Rain was falling on the windshield, and I waited for someone with an umbrella to walk by.
Aug. 16, 2018.
An interactive art machine generated much enthusiasm from a crowd around St-Laurent métro station. It was said that people could talk to the art piece and it would answer back in some way. This person seemed to engage in a conversation with it, but I'm not sure whether he agreed with the response.
Dave Sidaway: Memory, vision, and how to be cool
May 29, 2018.
Montreal received this public artwork, Source by Spanish artist Jaume Plensa, for its 375th anniversary, thanks to the contribution of two major patrons, France Chrétien Desmarais and André Desmarais. The sculpture is on loan to Montreal for at least 25 years. I like the idea of combining the new artwork with the Farine Five Roses sign, which is, in my view, a piece of art on its own.
June 4, 2018.
As a kid, I had a season pass to Expo 67 as well as Man and his World. The U.S. pavilion was a hit and the lineups were so long that I wasn't able to visit it in 1967. However, I did get inside when it was converted to an aviary. Today the pavilion in Jean-Drapeau Park is illuminated with a variety of colours.
June 27, 2018.
I frequently cycle along the Lachine Canal, which gives me an opportunity to scout photo-op locations. I chanced across this little guy cooling off in the Peel Basin.
John Mahoney: It's all about the timing
July 15, 2018.
When France defeated Croatia to win the World Cup in July, thousands of French fans flooded the intersection of St-Denis and Rachel Sts. There were pictures all around me as fans poured out of bars and restaurants and danced and sang in the street. Nathanael Haury showed up with a replica of the World Cup trophy and with a couple of joyous friends was hoisted onto soccer fans' shoulders. When several thousand French fans all sang La Marseillaise, I had my picture.
Nov. 22, 2018.
I was working the late shift and had a couple of outside assignments on the West Island that had to be done before sunset. The November day was unseasonably, bitterly cold and I was asked to keep an eye out for a cold-weather feature picture. After my last assignment in Dorval, I headed to Pointe Claire Village hoping to get something near the water with the setting sun. Because of rush hour traffic, I missed the best of what appeared to be a spectacular sunset so I turned east to head toward downtown and ran smack into this tableau of the moon rising over Pointe Claire with Lac St-Louis in the foreground. I pulled my car over and shot several frames with a 70-200mm zoom lens then went back to my car for a longer lens. By then, the moon had risen considerably and in doing so had gotten much brighter. The best photos were when it was lower in the sky and not as bright, which allowed the exposure of the moon to balance better with the ambient outside light and the warm light of the house on Lakeshore Rd.
April 16, 2018.
On that April morning, Montreal was hit with freezing rain, so I headed to the corner of Dr. Penfield Ave. and Peel St. to look for pictures of pedestrians navigating that notoriously slippery intersection. I didn't have to wait long before Xinkai Xu lost his footing and starting sliding down Peel on his back, almost taking out an unsuspecting woman waiting to cross the street.
Allen McInnis: Hard-hitting news, and bringing out the best in people
April 1, 2018.
Montreal Canadiens right wing Brendan Gallagher tries to shake it off after having his head driven into the ice by New Jersey Devils defenceman Ben Lovejoy. I was shocked by how hard the hit to Gally was, and that one person came to help him up from the ice, which took some time. He skated back to the bench unaided.
Aug. 1, 2018.
Being a photojournalist allows us to meet and speak with a really wide group of people. Chatting with Keish in her portrait studio before shooting her picture was a nice moment and after we shot a "classic" portrait, the one that was published, I started to pack up. Then I grabbed a quick, wider, more environmental picture of Keish, which I was happy with.
Aug. 10, 2018.
A simple portrait, but the time I spent at Restaurant Lawrence with sommelier Linda Milagros Violago was fun and interesting. I told her I wanted something a little different and she pulled out her corkscrew and lined it up with the centre of her eye. In a few seconds, I had the shot.
Related
Step through the looking glass to 2018 Year in Review( https://montrealgazette.com/2018-year-in-review )

