A snowfall warning issued for the Montreal area is forecasting a mix of rain and snow( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-rain-freezing-rain-welcome-to-the-rest-of-montreals-week ) Wednesday night that will coalesce into "sustained snow" in time for Thursday's morning rush rush hour.
A total of 15 to 20 centimetres of snow is expected to fall over the region over the next 24 hours. And the warning from Environment Canada,( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67#702177391744273262202002260504ww1070cwul ) issued at 5:01 a.m. Wednesday, cautions motorists to expect "poor travelling conditions due to low visibility and rapidly accumulating snow on roads, especially Thursday morning. Consider changing your travel plans. ... There may be a significant impact on rush hour traffic in urban areas."
The forecast for Wednesday afternoon calls for a high of 0 degrees Celsius with a windchill of minus-8 C and an accumulation of 2 centimetres of snow. Things will get dodgier this evening, with snow becoming mixed with rain overnight. While about 5 cm of snow is expected in Montreal, twice that amount could fall in Laval.
The forecast high for Thursday morning will be 2 degrees C. Expect snow mixed with rain in the morning and blowing snow in the afternoon.
Environment Canada's warning for the Montreal area is one of several issued for those regions of Quebec in the path of a low-pressure system originating in the American southwest.
Heavy snowfall is being predicted for regions north of the St. Lawrence Valley.
Accumulations of snow varying from 20 to 40 centimetres are forecast for the Outaouais and Mauricie regions, the Laurentians as well as the Lanaudière, Beauce, Bas-Saint-Laurent, Gaspé and Côte-Nord regions and from Baie-Comeau to Natashquan.
In the Quebec City region, as much as 45 centimetres of snow is being forecast.
Precipitation is expected to be much milder in Sherbrooke, Victoriaville, Lac-Mégantic, Sorel-Tracy, Drummondville and Thetford Mines.
Related
Blizzard proof! A spadeful of tips for safe snow shovelling( https://montrealgazette.com/news/blizzard-proof-a-spadeful-of-tips-for-safe-snow-shovelling )
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )

