It all happened so quickly, as automobile crashes do, right before the disbelieving eyes of Jermaine Robinson. In an instant, he knew there was only one thing to do: act. And do so without thinking.
"The odds of you seeing a car accident ... " the Alouettes' safety said this week. "Usually you drive past (one) and figure that looks bad. We saw the whole thing."
It was the afternoon of Sept. 3, 2017. Robinson was in the passenger seat. Behind the wheel was Brandon Peguese, a defensive lineman and his teammate on the Sioux Falls Storm of the Indoor Football League. They were en route to their day jobs, working as youth counsellors at a juvenile centre.
They were approaching an intersection, prepared to stop at the red light. Two other vehicles were travelling the other way and in opposite directions, driving on the green. One was going straight. The other attempted a turn. They might have both sped up. Instead, a crash occurred. One car ground to a halt in a parking lot, but the other, driven by Tami Crate, went directly into a light standard and burst into flames.
"She was in pretty bad shape because she was slumped over in the car," Robinson remembered. "She was knocked out, the seat belt still on her. The car was on fire. We're trying our best to pull her out, one by one. I'm trying to pull her out. He's trying to get the seat belt (unstrapped). We're taking turns, because ... we're trying to make sure we don't get hit with the flames."
It wasn't easy. The airbags had deployed on impact and the seat belt had her wedged in, but Robinson and Peguese, who plays for the Calgary Stampeders, had no time to hesitate. And they were concerned the car might explode.
"I just reacted. I didn't panic. It was instinct. Something took over," said Robinson, in his first season with Montreal.
Crate eventually was extricated, although she suffered a broken breastbone and three fractured ribs in the crash. At the hospital, according to a published report in the Argus Leader, family members were told Crate wasn't expected to survive. But, miraculously, she did.
Almost 11 months later, Robinson relives the act of valour as though it was a common occurrence, believing neither he nor Peguese did anything out of the ordinary. Robinson said, had he done nothing, it would have disturbed him indefinitely.
"That would have worried me more, that I had the opportunity to do something, or called 911," he said. "At that time, I didn't worry. We just wanted to get her out of the car. We didn't have time to think, we just reacted. We weren't thinking about the fire. To me, at the time, it didn't seem that bad.
"We go through life and just take, take, take. We never give back. You can give money. You can give a gift. But we never put our life on the line to give back or put ourselves in a situation where we might get harmed. That was my one time where it wasn't about me."
Montreal Alouettes' Jermaine Robinson and Tyquwan Glass defend against Winnipeg Blue Bombers' Darvin Adams during at Molson Stadium on June 22, 2018.
One month after the accident, Sioux Falls Fire Rescue bestowed Citizen Hero Awards on Robinson and Peguese. The mayor of the city also sent a letter of appreciation to the players. Crate presented both with worry stones, the word "courage" carved into them. Robinson said he keeps the memento in his wallet. He remains in occasional contact via social media with Crate.
Robinson vehemently denied the two players are heroes. Robinson, who lives in downtown Montreal, across the street from a fire station, said those are the true heroes because they're risking their lives on a daily basis.
"I did it one time," he said, shrugging. "They do it every day and put their life on the line. I did it one time in 20-something years.
"I didn't even feel I was doing something right. I was just doing what I thought I needed to do."
Robinson, 29, took a circuitous route to the Als. He has Canadian Football League experience with Ottawa and Hamilton but also spent three seasons with the Storm, where players receive barely more than $200 per game - provided their teams win. Per diem on the road is $20. The season runs from February until July, practices held at night so players can augment their income by working day jobs.
Robinson flew from South Dakota to Atlanta this spring, at his own expense, to attend a free-agent tryout camp staged by the Als. While the 6-foot-3, 205-pounder was invited to mini-camp and then cracked the roster out of training camp, he was recently released - only to be re-signed after Joe Burnett suffered a serious lower-body injury at Calgary last week.
Robinson remained in Montreal the brief time he was a free agent and was scheduled to return home to Pittsburgh the day after the game against the Stampeders.
"Everything's a lesson. That just reminded me how hard I worked to get back here," he said. "It reminded me ... don't think you've arrived or you're comfortable; keep working.
"This brought me back to life. It showed me I still love the game, even more."
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1
Related
Alouettes' Jermaine Robinson plays for the love of the game( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/alouettes-jermaine-robinson-plays-for-the-love-of-the-game?video_autoplay=true )
New quarterback Vernon Adams can't change Alouettes' losing ways( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/new-quarterback-vernon-adams-cant-change-alouettes-losing-ways )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

