QUEBEC - Despite a chorus of protests, the Legault government says it has no intention of backing down on last minute amendments to its school reform plan.
And it disputes claims by mayors of cities who say they have been left holding the bag - which could mean tax increases for citizens - because the new service centres (which replace school boards) will be allowed to seize the land they want from municipalities to build schools and pay nothing for it.
"There is an urgent need to act," Premier François Legault told reporters arriving for question period at the legislature. "Our law is very moderate.
"We give (service centres) two years to come to an agreement with each municipality before we require them to hand over the land."
Legault went so far as to say municipalities come out ahead because the government will pay to build the schools in their communities and that will help attract more citizens.
"I think it's a good deal," Legault said.
The comments came amid the turmoil sparked by the Coalition Avenir Québec government's decision to add a series of last-minute amendments to Bill 40( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/bill-40-opposition-parties-fail-to-block-caqs-use-of-closure ), legislation abolishing school boards to replace them with service centres.
Tabled in the legislature in the wee hours Saturday morning under the cloud of closure, the amendments not only immediately put an end to the jobs of hundreds of school board commissioners in the francophone system, they also gave the school service centres that will replace boards the power to force towns and cities to hand over municipal land - for free - if needed to build new schools.
Stunned, Quebec's mayors have lashed out( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/bill-40-heres-why-valerie-plante-and-other-quebec-mayors-are-fuming ) at the government saying they were never consulted about the matter.
Quebec's Union des municipalités (UMQ) denounced the move, describing it as a form of disguised expropriation power that Quebec is unilaterally handing over to non-elected service board directors.
On Tuesday, Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante again attacked, saying education is a provincial responsibility and cities and towns should not be asked to pay for new schools.
"I will not let the government pass the bill to us and let the municipalities pass it on to the citizens," Plante told reporters at Montreal City Hall. "I think it would be completely unfair."
"It would be unacceptable to us for the government to force us to buy private land and then give it away," she said. "In concrete terms, it's like telling the city of Montreal to buy a piece of downtown land for $40 million. Where am I going to find this money?" she said.
The mayor said she would discuss the issue with other mayors at upcoming meetings of the UMQ and the Montreal Metropolitan Community.
In fact, Gatineau Mayor Maxime Pedneaud-Jobin, who chairs the caucus of Quebec's larger cities, is insisting Education Minister Jean-François Roberge appear before them Thursday when the cities meet in Montreal.
Roberge told reporters he would contact the disgruntled mayors by phone, but argued the government had no choice but to act because the current system of allowing school boards and cities negotiate such arrangements on their own is not working.
His officials estimate as many as 50 needed school construction projects are currently blocked. Roberge noted no new high schools have been opened in Quebec since 2006 despite skyrocketing growth in student numbers.
"The status quo is Griffintown where people realized two or three years too late that there were not enough schools and no more land to build them on," Roberge said. "We have to work differently."
He did concede that inserting the amendment at the last minute was not ideal, but insisted it was not ready earlier.
Municipal Affairs Minister Andrée Laforest denied the government was forcing the reforms and said teams of her officials have been on the ground for months informing mayors what was coming down the pipe from Quebec City.
She also blamed the mayors for years of non-co-operation with the old school boards.
"There are lands that were offered (for schools) in agricultural lands, in swamps, in flood zones," Laforest said. "It's kind of particular. Sometimes even right by highways."
Earlier, Quebec's three opposition parties called on the government to at least temporarily suspend the amendments.
"I am stunned that over the course of a few hours the minister (Roberge) has managed to turn opinion unanimously against himself," interim Liberal leader Pierre Arcand told reporters.
"Whether it is parents' committees or municipalities or unions, all the groups are absolutely furious."
"This reform is like buying a house where you are only allowed to visit the outside but not the inside where there are plenty of hidden defects but you are obliged to buy it anyway," added Liberal education critic Marwah Rizqy.
"There's a limit to bulldozing people."
Parti Québécois education critic Véronique Hivon accused the education minister of trying to pull a fast one on municipal leaders.
"The minister has insulted the mayors, he has insulted all the opposition members of this parliament with his way of doing things," Hivon said.
But there were also questions Tuesday about how the new service centres will work now that the commissioners are gone.
Diane Beaudet, a former school commissioner in Hochelaga-Maisonneuve, said she was appalled at how Bill 40 was rammed through the National Assembly in the middle of the night.
Now that commissioners have been ousted, some parents are uncertain about who will respond to their needs, said Beaudet, a commissioner at the Commission scolaire de Montréal since 2014.
"I was available on (Facebook) messenger morning, noon and night," she said. "It wasn't just parents who contacted me. I was contacted by community organizations dealing with vulnerable parents who needed help."
Many parents in her community have bad memories of their time at school and are uncomfortable calling the principal, she said.
"We were local people who knew the issues," she said. "We could direct parents to the right place or answer questions. They have destabilized the system."
Parents who have questions about their child's school or their education should contact the principal's office, said Alain Perron, a spokesperson for the CSDM.
Bill 40 is so complex and has so many amendments that school board lawyers are examining it with a fine-tooth comb so they can explain the changes to employees and teachers.
Under the new law, parents are permitted to enrol their child in a school in another service centre, if there's space.
For instance, a parent living in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce could enrol their child in a school on the West Island if the school is not full. However, if the West Island school would need a spot for a local child the following year, the N.D.G. student would have to return to a school in that neighbourhood.
Katherine Wilton and Marian Scott of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/philipauthier( https://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Related
Bill 40: English school boards considering a legal challenge( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-7daW )
Bill 40: Here's why Valérie Plante and other Quebec mayors are fuming( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-7d37 )
Bill 40: Opposition parties fail to block CAQ's use of closure( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-7cyH )

