Benoît Huberdeau usually visits his mother, Raymonde, at her Laval nursing home every two or three weeks, making the 90-minute drive from his home to spend a few hours with her and lift her spirits.
At 90 years old, Raymonde is bedridden, has a heart condition and is beginning to wrestle with bouts of dementia.
When the government first banned visits to seniors' residences amid the COVID-19 pandemic( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebecs-chslds-totally-unprepared-for-pandemic-grieving-woman-says/wcm/e03e06ad-b7eb-46d4-9caf-3d7fa876cd56/ ), Huberdeau and his six siblings were frustrated but understood it was for the greater good.
Now as reports emerge of more and more outbreaks in seniors' residences, that understanding is turning into deep concern and distress. On Monday, Huberdeau was told there was one confirmed COVID-19 case in his mother's residence, the Centre d'hébergement de Sainte-Dorothée.
By Thursday, health authorities confirmed the centre now has 26 cases - and three deaths.
"We understand the measures, but she's still our mother," Huberdeau, 59, said Thursday. "We're used to encouraging her through this. It always did her good to see us. Now she's closing in on herself and I don't know if she understands what's going on."
As outbreaks have multiplied in public and private seniors' residences across Quebec( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebecs-chslds-totally-unprepared-for-pandemic-grieving-woman-says/wcm/e03e06ad-b7eb-46d4-9caf-3d7fa876cd56/ ), government officials have said stopping the spread inside the homes is the province's greatest challenge.
As of Thursday, nearly one-quarter of all seniors' residences in the province - a total of 519 - had at least one COVID-19 case. In the greater Montreal region, there are now outbreaks in 20 residences and 148 health network employees that have tested positive( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-outbreaks-have-hit-13-long-term-care-centres-in-montreal/wcm/ffc73c0f-0a09-4edf-84ab-d9d3d17c2c9e/ ).
Asked Thursday whether he felt the government has lost control over the situation, Premier François Legault said he doesn't believe it has.
The government announced a pay raise for frontline workers in the health network, something the premier said he hopes will convince some to switch from part-time to full-time and increase staffing in the centres.
And Legault reiterated it's crucial people respect the ban on visiting the residences, calling it a matter of life and death.
The government also continues to look into ways of minimizing health network workers moving between different centres and potentially spreading the virus without knowing it, Quebec Health Minister Danielle McCann said.
McCann said the province is trying to find new measures to ensure seniors inside the homes aren't feeling too isolated from their loved ones, be it by more telephone calls or distributing iPads within the centres to allow for video calls.
"We're very sensitive to the situation (seniors) are living," McCann said.
Legault also said he understands some Quebecers may be feeling the need to take their family members out of the residences given the outbreaks.
The premier said he wasn't ruling out the idea, but mentioned that all decisions are being made on a case-by-case basis. Criteria such as the person's health and the centre's overall situation and location would need to be considered.
As for releasing a detailed list of which seniors' homes are the hardest hit in the province, as some have requested, Quebec public health director Horacio Arruda said that isn't in the plans at the moment, questioning whether it's in the public's interest to do so.
Huberdeau and others who spoke to the Montreal Gazette said communication with the centres has become increasingly difficult as the situation has worsened. Families are instead relying on getting updates from nurses they've grown to know through the years.
Huberdeau wishes the government would be more forthcoming about it all - he understands officials are trying to keep a positive tone to reassure people, he said, but wonders whether it's time to be more open about what's happening in the residences so families can begin bracing for the worst.
But mostly, Huberdeau wishes he could somehow buy more time with his mother. When staff organized a video call between the two on Monday, Huberdeau said it was more confusing for her than anything else.
"It's heartbreaking," he said.
"We lost our father a few years ago, but we were with him at the end," Huberdeau added, breaking down. "I fear we won't be able to be with our mother."
jfeith@postmedia.com( mailto:jfeith@postmedia.com )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow their updates on April 2 right here.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-ottawa-braces-for-flood-of-calls-for-financial-help ) All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).
Related
Quebec's CHSLDs totally unprepared for pandemic, grieving woman says( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebecs-chslds-totally-unprepared-for-pandemic-grieving-woman-says/wcm/e03e06ad-b7eb-46d4-9caf-3d7fa876cd56/ )
Coronavirus outbreaks have hit 13 long-term care centres in Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-outbreaks-have-hit-13-long-term-care-centres-in-montreal/wcm/ffc73c0f-0a09-4edf-84ab-d9d3d17c2c9e/ )
Click here for all our coronavirus-related news( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus/ )

