Monday marks the biggest step yet in the slow reopening of the Montreal region, with restaurants now allowed to offer table service, gyms reopening, and indoor gatherings officially permitted in private homes, but public health authorities stress that many COVID-19 restrictions remain in place.
Movie theatres are also allowed to reopen as of Monday, as are day camps and houses of worship.
As of this past weekend, zoos, gardens, agro-tourism farms, tourist information centres and indoor sports facilities were allowed to open. Access to outdoor public exercise equipment and play structures in all public parks is now permitted. Daycares are no longer requiring physical distancing between children or between children and daycare staff. (However, the two-metre distancing rule between adults remains in effect.)
Many restaurateurs were scrambling Sunday, getting their dining rooms and terrasses ready for customers and getting ready to facilitate two-metre distancing between customers who don't live together. A maximum of 10 people is permitted at each table, but diners from different households must sit at least two metres apart - a requirement that greatly reduces seating capacity at most establishments.
Some restaurateurs, including Bruno Zarka, owner and chef of Le Déli du Vieux Port on St-Paul St., were so anxious to finally start seating customers again, they were planning to open their doors at one minute after midnight on Monday.
Zarka has been offering his takeout menu - smoked meat, meatballs, gravlax, salads, burgers, pizza, pasta and, of course, poutine - since May 1, but he estimates sales were down about 90 per cent. He hopes business will pick up this week once he can seat people in the dining room or on his terrasse, which he plans to expand. Distancing rules have forced him to reduce his indoor capacity to 29 customers, down from 45 before the pandemic.
"We've put in some Plexiglas walls to separate all the tables, so we've lost seating (capacity) for about 15 customers," he said.
"We don't know if the customers are going to come back," said Zarka, adding he has only rehired six of his 14 employees. "For example, I hear in Quebec (City) restaurants are empty for the moment, whereas in the Laurentians they are full. So we don't know. ... We are so dependent on tourism, particularly in the Old Port, and everything has been closed."
In the Plateau-Mont-Royal borough, Félix Tremblay was making plans to reopen the dining area at his restaurant La Prunelle. Tremblay said the confinement period has forced him and his staff to be creative, coming up with new ideas to keep the business alive.
Early in the pandemic, Tremblay decided to throw open the huge picture windows of his Duluth Ave. restaurant to sell off pantry stock. Bags of flour were particularly popular when everyone was making homemade bread, he said.
Next, he and his staff began offering takeout. "For a while we were the only ones open in the neighbourhood and people really seemed to appreciate it. We started selling street food, stuff that people could eat while out walking, like lobster rolls, crab rolls and shrimp rolls."
He also started selling soft ice cream to go, and lately has been hosting events, bringing in guest chefs from other restaurants, with proceeds going to worthy causes. On Sunday, for example, the chef from the St-Zotique St. restaurant Pumpui was cooking up Thai fare to raise funds for Hoodstock, a Montreal North organization dedicated to fighting systemic inequalities.
Although his dining room will reopen Thursday, Tremblay has decided not to offer table service just yet.
"People will still order from outside, and then they can eat outside or bring their food in to the tables, which we will disinfect between uses," he said. "We decided not to provide table service because we find it difficult to serve wearing masks, safety glasses, etc."
Tremblay is waiting for a permit from the city to open a terrasse. Both he and Zarka said that process has been frustratingly slow.
Although the dining room of his Duluth Ave. restaurant La Prunelle will reopen this week, Félix Tremblay has decided not to offer table service just yet. "People will still order from outside, and then they can eat outside or bring their food in to the tables, which we will disinfect between uses."
Public pools opened on the weekend, to the delight of many Montrealers sweating through the second heat wave since the pandemic began.
Sophie Couture, co-ordinator at the Confederation Pool in Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, said roughly 140 people used the pool on Saturday. A maximum of 185 will be allowed into the pool area, down from 560, to facilitate distancing. So far, so good, she said.
"Everyone seemed to understand and tried to keep their distances," Couture said.
As the pool opened Sunday morning, a lineup had formed around the building, with markers indicating where people should stand in order to remain two metres apart. The locker rooms are still closed, so people are asked to shower at home before using the pool. The diving board area is closed, and residents may be asked to cut their pool time short if more than 60 people are waiting.
Joaquin Poundja and Karine Fortin were at the pool with their children, aged five and three. They felt comfortable using the pool and were pleased it had reopened, especially given the heat wave.
"Honestly, I'm not worried about it," Fortin said of using the pool. "As long as everyone respects the recommended distances, I don't see any problem."
The Montreal region had 26,937 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 3,298 people in the region have died, according to data posted Friday by Montreal public health.
mlalonde@postmedia.com
jfeith@postmedia.com
Related
Up to 50 people can gather in indoor public places as of June 22
Students must attend school this fall and follow distancing measures
Montreal heat wave: Here's where to cool off in newly opened city pools
Note to readers: All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

