Here's what happened as the world turned.
Hurricane Florence is zeroing in on the southeastern U.S. coast( https://montrealgazette.com/news/world/we-hope-to-have-something-left-fierce-hurricane-florence-zeroing-in-on-southeastern-coast/wcm/2614e65f-338d-4992-b983-8e14707929a8 ), with more than 10 million people in its sights. Florence's top sustained wind speeds dropped from a high of 225 km/h to 175 km/h as its outer rain bands approached the North Carolina coast early Thursday, reducing the storm from Category 4 to Category 2, but forecasters warned that the enormous wind field has been growing larger, raising the risk of the ocean surging onto land. "Do you want to get hit with a train or do you want to get hit with a cement truck?" said Jeff Byard, an administrator with the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
A delegation of U.S. Catholic cardinals and bishops met Thursday with Pope Francis( https://nationalpost.com/pmn/news-pmn/pope-summons-bishops-for-february-abuse-prevention-summit ) as a new bombshell dropped in the Catholic Church's long-running sex abuse and coverup scandal. Pope Francis on Thursday accepted the resignation of a West Virginia bishop, Michael Bransfield, and at the same time authorized a fellow bishop to investigate allegations that Bransfield sexually harassed adults, officials said. Bransfield had been implicated in 2012 in an infamous Philadelphia priestly sex abuse case, but he denied ever abusing anyone and claimed vindication years ago. He continued with his ministry until he offered to retire, as required, when he turned 75 last week.
Bill 101 strikes again.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/teen-in-grade-11-at-royal-west-academy-ensnared-by-bill-101 ) Alois Orozco, a Grade 11 student at Royal West Academy, has been told by the school board that he has to be transplanted - to a new school, in a new area, in French. Though he has been in English school since his family arrived in Montreal in 2010, the conditions have changed now that they are permanent residents. "I feel like they're taking the law too literally - especially since it's my last year and I've been studying almost my whole life in English," said Alois, 16. "There should be some exceptions. ... It won't hurt them for me to do a last year in English, but if I have to go to school in French, it'll cause a lot of damage."
The administration of École secondaire des Sources decided to close the school for the day Thursday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-school-will-be-closed-thursday-after-social-media-threats ) after Montreal police obtained reports of threats made toward the students on social media. Police would not provide any details about the threats, other than to say they targeted students at the Dollard-des-Ormeaux school. After other students alerted them of what they had seen on social media, the police took the threats very seriously, said Constable Jean-Pierre Brabant. "We're trying to identify and locate the person responsible," he said.
CREDIT: Jordan Zivitz, Montreal Gazette

