By Paul Cherry and Christopher Curtis
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante declared the city has entered into in a state of emergency on Friday with the goal of providing aid to the homeless and prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
"With the evolution of the situation, we have reached a point where we have given ourselves new powers, exceptional powers, to make us more agile," the mayor said late Friday afternoon. "I declared the state of emergency because our resources for the homeless need reinforcements and we need them now. It is the most vulnerable among us who need us.
"Our homeless population finds itself without food, no place to rest and with no protection and that is unacceptable. (Premier François Legault) asks us to stay home. But what does that mean when you have no home?"
Hours earlier, Quebec's director of public health, Horacio Arruda, asked that the city declare the state of emergency because the virus is spreading faster in Montreal than in other parts of the province.
Plante noted earlier this week the downtown and Guy Favreau YMCAs were turned into welcome centres for homeless people who have been turned away from other locations trying to respect social distancing recommendations. She also said the former Royal Victoria Hospital was being modified to help homeless people diagnosed with the coronavirus or awaiting the result of a test to determine if they have it. Those already diagnosed with the virus will be placed on one floor, while those awaiting test results will be sheltered on another.
"But we have to go farther then we already have. New shelters will be set up in the coming days. The city will also set up outdoor day centres in public spaces frequented by the homeless. There will be five sites that can welcome 1,000 people per day," Plante said, while adding the first site will be at Cabot Square in the heart of downtown.
The mayor said her declaration is comparable to when a state of emergency is declared when there is a flood in the city and authorities need to take over spaces, for example a parking lot or a park. Plante said the powers also allow the city to dispatch police and firefighters into areas where they are needed.
During the press conference at city hall, Plante also addressed rumours the city would somehow be shut down on Friday.
"I want to make something clear. A lot of information has been circulating. I want to assure the public and set the record straight. The city is not under lockdown. Neither is it under quarantine. Not today, not tomorrow. If there is a day when it becomes the case it will be at the request of the Quebec government and the public health department. If it is ever the case, it will be done in a gradual manner. So I want to say we are not at that point at all."
"If we have to put other measures in place, like closing the bridges, admittedly, we are ready," Plante said, while repeating that it would have to be up to the provincial government "to push that button."
Quebec's Civil Code includes a section through which a "local municipality may declare a state of emergency in all or part of its territory where, in an actual or imminent major disaster situation, immediate action is required to protect human life, health or physical integrity which, in its opinion, it is unable to take within the scope of its normal operating rules or of any applicable emergency preparedness plan."
Plante said she doesn't want the city to reach a point where police are pulling people over merely to ask them where they are going. She also said she does not want to completely close off access to the city's parks.
"For a lot of people it is the only backyard they have, but people have to be super-vigilant (to maintain a two-metre distance from other people)," she said, while noting stairways to Mount Royal were closed because of reports that people weren't following those recommendations.
Stewart Greville, left, speaks with Resilience Montreal project coordinator David Chapman in Cabot Square in Montreal on Friday, March 27, 2020.
Stewart Greville, who was at Cabot Square on Friday, said he doesn't know if he has the coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ) and he desperately wanted to self isolate Thursday after being tested for COVID-19( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/health-network-having-trouble-delivering-on-pledge-to-house-homeless-shelter/ ), but instead he spent the night with 106 other homeless people at the downtown YMCA.
"I was in a line where people were coughing, spitting, fighting for six hours," said Greville, 62. "After waiting for six hours, I slept in a dorm where our beds were just three feet apart. This is dangerous. If I'm infected, a lot of people were exposed to the virus last night."
For two weeks, Quebecers have been on lockdown to fight the spread ofCOVID-19( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-bank-of-canada-lowers-interest-rate-to-boost-economy/wcm/42c413c7-c143-439e-a12c-256afd34a53c/ ): schools and non-essential businesses are closed, police have the power to arrest people for gathering in groups of more than two( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-laval-police-field-100-calls-about-violations-of-safety-protocols/ ) and millions are staying home for days at a time.
Now - 15 days after the province announced its first social-distancing measures - Health and Social Services Minister Danielle McCann says there's a plan to house the homeless in a wing of the old Royal Victoria Hospital( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/royal-vic-converted-into-isolation-centre-for-montreals-homeless/ ). The minister said Friday homeless people will be moved out of crowded shelters and into "places where there is more space," but did not provide further detail.
The extent of the problem began to surface on Monday, when a homeless man who tested positive for coronavirus was picked up by police( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/health-network-having-trouble-delivering-on-pledge-to-house-homeless-shelter/wcm/af52249b-dec6-4ee6-b6fc-5f8e835281e6/ ) while standing in line at the Old Brewery Mission. He'd been tested two days earlier, but was allowed to wander the city despite exhibiting symptoms of the illness.
In response, the mission's executive director - Matthew Pearce - said Quebec's health ministry would provide hotel rooms to homeless people so they could self-isolate while awaiting test results. But on Thursday, Pearce said the province was struggling to keep that promise( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/health-network-having-trouble-delivering-on-pledge-to-house-homeless-shelter/ ).
A spokesperson with CIUSSS Centre-Sud told the Montreal Gazette on Thursday he had "no idea" about the pledge to house homeless people in hotels. Contacted again Friday, the spokesperson said he had no new information.
The Old Brewery Mission isn't taking new residents( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-homeless-can-stay-in-a-hotel-while-awaiting-coronavirus-test-results/ ) and it's serving most of its lunches in to-go bags so clients don't have to eat under the same roof.
The Resilience Montreal day centre was forced to shutter its doors Thursday and move its services into Cabot Square. On Friday, about 100 people gathered in the Atwater Ave. park, a clear violation of social-distancing norms.
Victoria sits on a ledge in Cabot Square in Montreal on Friday, March 27, 2020.
"Services everywhere are shutting down, people are sleeping on the streets, they're eating less, it's really tense on the ground," said David Chapman, who runs Resilience Montreal. "I've never seen so many homeless people in the park at once. They're coming all the way from Berri St. and that's causing some rifts with the local homeless."
Greville said he had a high fever and "nasty cough" Thursday.
"I suppose I was lucky to sleep indoors, but I lined up outside the YMCA at 2 p.m. They let us in at 8 p.m.," he said. "I don't know what I exposed others to or what they exposed me to, but we're talking about a life or death situation here. If the province has a strategy, it feels like it's a little too late."
Chapman says there should be mobile testing at Cabot Square or in other places that serve the homeless.
"We have no idea how big the problem is, and that's scary."
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow their updates on March 27 right here.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-bank-of-canada-lowers-interest-rate-to-boost-economy ) All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).
Related
Coronavirus: homeless face a "ticking time bomb" with COVID-19( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/health-network-having-trouble-delivering-on-pledge-to-house-homeless-shelter/ )
Coronavirus: eighth death linked to COVID-19 in Quebec( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/eighth-death-attributed-to-covid-19-in-quebec/wcm/a4242bc4-26ee-45a0-95bc-6c85ad52ddc6/ )

