SALABERRY-DE-VALLEYFIELD - A Coalition Avenir Québec government would overhaul Quebec's entire CHSLD nursing home network and replace it with a new series of senior homes.
The CAQ is describing the idea, called the "Maisons des Aînés," as a "project of a generation." It estimates the first phase of the project would cost $1 billion, followed by $245 million a year in operating expenses.
The party says the idea is "destined to replace the CHSLDs that everyone dreads," calling the current model "obsolete, out-of-date and poorly adapted to users' needs."
Quebec's CHSLDs, the government network of nursing homes known as Centres d'hébergement de soins de longue durée, has been criticized( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/nursing-home-class-action-gathers-steam-as-more-than-100-patients-come-forward ) by some for poor care and lengthy waits.
The CAQ says its new senior homes would be "warm, peaceful and comfortable" and be adequately staffed to "take good care" of residents. Each home would have bigger, air-conditioned rooms.
The party said there are currently 2,600 Quebecers waiting for a spot in a CHSLD. A CAQ government would start meeting with users, staff and architects to build 30 of the new homes to meet that demand during its first mandate.
CAQ leader François Legault made the announcement outside an old CHSLD in the Beauharnois riding, southwest of Montreal.
"The state has a responsibility to house our seniors and we need a new direction," Legault said. "We must do it in a humane way. We owe it to our elders who built Quebec."
The party says the project is a 20-year plan and that all CHSLDs would be replaced by 2038. The new proposed homes would house between 70 and 130 people each.
As for current CHSLDs, Legault said he would make sure he would address any current concerns over lack of air conditioning by next summer, saying he would ensure each one is equipped with a common space that has air conditioning in case of heat waves.
But Legault said the new homes built under a CAQ government would all come with air conditioning in each room.
Reminded of a statement he made in 2002 as health minister in a Parti Québécois government, in which he said heat waves only last a few days a year and he had bigger priorities than ensuring CHSLD's had air conditioning, Legault said you can't compare today's summers to those of 16 years ago.
"The planet is getting warmer," he said. "We have heat waves that last longer and are more frequent."
Legault was to visit with seniors Friday morning.
This report will be updated.
jfeith@postmedia.com( mailto:jfeith@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/jessefeith( https://twitter.com/JesseFeith )
Related
Quebec election: CAQ vows to raise legal age for cannabis use( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-elections-caq-starts-campaign )
Read more of our 2018 Quebec election coverage right here( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-elections )
Can't get enough of Quebec politics? Join our Facebook group( https://www.facebook.com/groups/TheQuebecBureau/ )
CREDIT: Jesse Feith, Montreal Gazette

