The Globe and Mail's was recognized with six prizes last night at the 59th National Newspaper Awards in Toronto, more than any other news organization in the country.
? The Globe and Mail's was recognized with six prizes last night at the 59th National Newspaper Awards in Toronto, more than any other news organization in the country.
The newspaper had 15 nominations among the 21 categories heading into the annual dinner that salutes the best of Canadian print journalism, also the highest number among Canadian news organizations for the ninth year in a row.
"We are proud of our journalists and the intelligence, wit and courage with which they pursue their journalism," said the newspaper's editor-in-chief, Edward Greenspon, Friday night. "They often work in difficult and pressured circumstances in ensuring they fulfill our duty to create an informed citizenry."
The Globe's sweep spanned across the journalism continuum, from Stephanie Nolen's win in the explanatory work category, to John Lehmann's award for news feature photography.
The Report on Business team of Boyd Erman, Jacquie McNish, Tara Perkins and Heather Scoffield clinched the business-writing category.
Meanwhile, Roy MacGregor won his fifth National Newspaper Award for a short feature, and Ian Brown won his fourth for a long feature.
Graeme Smith was rewarded for his international reporting, while The Globe and Mail's deep commitment to international issues as a whole was recognized by the newspaper's three nominations in the category.
Among other winners last night were Montreal's La Presse, which won five awards, and the Ottawa Citizen and the Toronto Star, which each won two.
The full list of nominees, with winners marked with astericks:
News Feature Photography: *John Lehmann, The Globe, for a photo of a young mother kissing her conjoined twins in Vernon, B.C.; Bruno Schlumberger, Ottawa Citizen/CanWest News Service, for a photo of retired military nursing sisters having a snack at the National Military Cemetery; Tara Walton of the Toronto Star for a photo of a two-year-old girl recovering from a heart transplant.
Explanatory Work: Maria Cook, Ottawa Citizen, for a story on an engineering revolution that makes it faster and safer to replace aging bridges; Linda Gyulai, the Montreal Gazette, for an examination of Montreal's crumbling water system from reservoir to sewers; and *Stephanie Nolen, The Globe, for a story on how inexpensive vaccinations, mosquito nets and vitamins are saving the lives of children in the developing world.
Short Features: Émilie Côté, La Presse, Montreal, for a piece on Bangladesh refugees forced to flee their homes because of rising seas; *Roy MacGregor, The Globe, for a story on funeral service for a slain RCMP officer; and Graeme Smith, The Globe, for a story on what happens when an Afghan is found dead.
Business: Renata D'Aliesio, Calgary Herald, for a story of how the government and unknown agencies seek to regulate water; *Boyd Erman, Jacquie McNish, Tara Perkins and Heather Scoffield, The Globe, for stories on the sub-prime mortgage crisis; and Eric Reguly, Boyd Erman, Sinclair Stewart, Andrew Willis of The Globe for work on the takeover of BCE Inc.
Columns: Les Leyne, Victoria Times Colonist; *Gordon Sinclair, Winnipeg Free Press; Margaret Wente, The Globe.
Arts and Entertainment: *Marty Klinkenberg, Saint John Telegraph-Journal, for stories on New Brunswick arts and entertainment; Lisa Rochon, The Globe, for stories on architecture; and Jon Wells, the Hamilton Spectator, for a story on producer and songwriter Daniel Lanois.
Feature Photography: Charla Jones, The Globe, for a photo of Leonard Cohen at his home in Montreal ; Phil Hossack, Winnipeg Free Press, for a shot of lightning illuminating an abandoned grain elevator; *Bruno Schlumberger, Ottawa Citizen/CanWest News Service, for a photo from Paris of a painter hiding his face from the camera alongside a self-portrait.
International Reporting: Stephanie Nolen, The Globe, for a story on the quest in South Africa to find and identify bodies of people killed during the apartheid era; Doug Saunders, The Globe, for a series on the world's middle class; *Graeme Smith, The Globe, for stories on the torture of detainees in the Afghan war.
Editorials: Gerald Flood, Winnipeg Free Press; Mary Janigan, The Globe; *André Pratte, La Presse, Montreal.
Long Features: Carolyn Abraham, The Globe, for a story on the growing movement to bury the unborn ; *Ian Brown, The Globe, for a feature on spring cleaning; Sue Montgomery, the Montreal Gazette, for a feature on Dawson College shooter Kimveer Gill.
News Photography: Mike Carroccetto, Ottawa Citizen/CanWest News Service, for a photo of a woman cradling the cat who woke her up in time to flee a burning building; *Dave Chidley, The Canadian Press, for a picture of Conrad Black giving a one-finger salute to the press; Cathie Coward, the Hamilton Spectator, for a photo of an imprint left behind after a five-year-old boy fell nine stories onto the soft-waterlogged ground and lived.
Breaking News: Barrie Examiner team's coverage of the massive fire that destroyed much of Barrie's historic downtown; *Mary Vallis of the National Post for coverage of the Virginia Tech massacre; the Vancouver Sun team of Lori Culbert, Neal Hall, Jeff Lee, Chad Skelton and Derrick Penner for coverage of the Pickton verdict.
Beat Reporting: Frank Armstrong, Kingston Whig-Standard, for crime and justice reporting; *Bruno Bisson, La Presse, Montreal, for reporting on Montreal's transportation issues; Jen Skerritt, Winnipeg Free Press, for stories on health care in Manitoba.
Politics: Gary Dimmock, Ottawa Citizen, for the alleged political backdoor negotiations of mayoral candidate Terry Kilrea and Ottawa Mayor Larry O'Brien; *Kathryn May, Ottawa Citizen, for stories about the mismanagement of the RCMP pension and insurance funds; and Paula Simons, Edmonton Journal, for stories on an Alberta government agency's tactics against a group of farmers.
Local Reporting: *Gordon Hoekstra, Prince George Citizen, for a stories about air quality issues in the city; Elisabeth Johns of the Cornwall Standard-Freeholder for a series on domestic violence in the community; Ann Lukits of the Kingston Whig-Standard for stories on declining care for seniors and a shortage of doctors in nursing homes.
Presentation: Genevieve Biloski, National Post; Brian Hughes, Toronto Star; *Spencer Wynn, Toronto Star.
Special Project: Halifax Chronicle-Herald for a series of stories in Afghanistan focusing on the 2nd Battalion, Royal Canadian Regiment, based in the Maritimes; Toronto Star for a project on poverty with a focus on social justice; *La Presse of Montreal for a worldwide look at the implications of a world without a clean and abundant supply of water.
Sports Photography: Paul Chiasson, The Canadian Press, for a photo of a Canadian hockey player upside down after a check from a Russian player; *David Cooper, Toronto Star, for a celebration leap by Ontario skip Glenn Howard in a curling championship; Darren Stone, Victoria Times-Colonist, for an all-out stretch by the ball carrier to reach the end zone in a football game.
Investigations: Jim Bronskill and Sue Bailey of The Canadian Press for an investigation into the use of tasers by police forces; Kevin Donovan, David Bruser and Andrew Bailey of the Toronto Star for a series on phony charities; *Michèle Ouimet, La Presse, Montreal, for stories on Canada's mission in Afghanistan and what has happened to aid sent there.
Sports: *Colin Hunter of the Waterloo Region Record for features about unusual sports such as the culture of a skateboard park; Kevin Mitchell of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix for story about Fred Saskamoose, a young Cree who gave up on the NHL to return home; and Mary Ormsby, Toronto Star, for stories on minor hockey's failure to attract immigrants, the relationship between the late John Ferguson and his son, John Jr., and the purchase of a showjumping horse by a wealthy princess.
Editorial Cartooning: *Serge Chapleau, La Presse, Montreal; Patrick Corrigan, Toronto Star; John B. Larter, Brandon Sun.

