The good news is that this year's spring is expected to be far milder than that experienced last year. The bad news is we'll have to fight our way through a few more snowstorms before we finally experience it.
The MétéoMédia weather network on Monday posted its spring forecast, predicting an end to winter that will only occur by the middle of March.
However, the spring equinox on March 20 will usher in a few days of mild weather, the network says.
"This March you can be sure we won't expect to see the 20 degree (Celsius) weather we experienced during the student strikes in 2012, where we saw unheard of temperatures like 25 ... (but) we can easily reach temperatures of 15 degrees and we think it will continue into April," said MétéoMédia chief meteorologist André Monette.
Monette also forecasts that the roller-coaster temperatures experienced over the course of this winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/weather-whiplash-yes-montreal-winters-are-getting-wetter-and-icier ) will persist into the spring, in which mild weather followed cold on an almost daily basis.
However the frigid April we experienced last year and that saw a snowstorm break( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sunday-storm-could-bring-24-hours-of-freezing-rain-meteorologist ) during the second half of that month is not in the forecast.
"We experienced a wintery April," said Monette. "This year, it may be far more agreeable ... (with temperatures) within the norms, but within the norms for April - 12 degrees during the day and one degree at night."
Monette cautioned however that the large accumulation of snow that blanketed all but the southern edge of the province could increase the risk of flooding in those areas.
"The Laurentians, the Mauricie and Quebec City regions had enormous amounts of snow, so the ingredients for a flood season( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood ) are there."
Monette said the the amount of rainfall that will be added to the runoff from melting snow will determine how devastating any flooding could be. But he added that at the moment, it's too early to make any predictions.
Related
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )
Montreal winter-driving guide: How to avoid sliding, sliding ... bang!( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang )

