Coronavirus updates, July 28: Quebec reports 169 new cases, three more deaths
All of today's coronavirus updates in one place.
Officials monitoring Chambly Basin after invasive grass carp is reeled in
Experts from Quebec's department of forests, wildlife and parks are closely monitoring the Chambly Basin after a sport fisher caught a grass carp there on July 16.
EMSB Parents Committee calls for optional at-home learning
The English Montreal School Board Parents Committee plans to call on the Quebec government to make school attendance in person optional rather than mandatory when elementary and high schools reopen on Aug. 31.
It also wants the government to drop the idea of creating "pods" or "bubbles" of up to six students in preschool up to Grade 9 if physical distancing can be respected in a school.
Quebec City a hot spot for real-estate sales in June
The price of a typical single-family dwelling in Quebec City increased more between May and June than it did in any Canadian city except Hamilton, according to data from the Canadian Real Estate Association (CREA).
Allison Hanes: Why is Vision Zero failing to prevent pedestrian deaths?
It has been a while, but it's happening again.
Pedestrians are getting killed. Two have died in Montreal in the space of a week.
Ottawa announces full inquiry into Nova Scotia shootings
Bowing to public pressure, the federal and Nova Scotia governments agreed Tuesday to scuttle their plans for a joint review into the April mass shooting that claimed 22 lives and instead establish a more rigorous and transparent public inquiry.
Men still want answers after ex-cop accused of sex crimes dies
From the moment François Lamarre was arrested and charged with sex crimes against young boys last year, one of the complainants in the case says his focus completely shifted.
It was no longer about the alleged abuse done to him, he says, or the toll it took on his life. Instead, it became about finding answers: Why, despite previous complaints, had police not acted earlier?
LaSalle house fire takes life of 12-year-old girl
A 12-year-old girl died Tuesday morning after a fire broke out just before 9:30 at a home on Marroni St. in LaSalle.

