The man arrested during a confrontation with Justin Trudeau in June says he's running to become the Bloc Québécois candidate in the prime minister's riding and he can count on support from Quebec's far right.
Storm Alliance - which has staged rallies at the Canada-U.S. border to "protect" Quebecers from refugee claimants - sent a delegation to the campaign launch of Matthieu Brien Wednesday.
Brien says he wants to represent the Bloc in the Papineau riding in the 2019 federal election. The 31-year-old confronted Trudeau during an event to celebrate Quebec's fête nationale, calling the prime minister "mon tabarnak" and accusing him of betraying Quebecers.
He was arrested in Jarry Park that day and pleaded guilty to a charge of obstructing a peace officer in the execution of his duty. Brien pleaded not guilty and was released under a court order not to participate in political activities.
On Wednesday, just moments after Brien's lawyer had that condition lifted, he stood on the steps of Montreal's courthouse and declared his candidacy for federal office.
In a livestream of the press conference( https://www.facebook.com/100018249364818/videos/263433997608244/?fb_dtsg_ag=AdwtRFCj6b3o4So_gVz0EGcxRqpAlxOmIwOZxkukFkKtRA%3AAdyE4VFIMM6VRSYGpx_9P3ilv0UgBK0AdfRpBkeA_9fueg ), one of the attendees can be seen wearing a Storm Alliance sweatshirt. Maxime Fiset, an anti-radicalization expert and former white supremacist, compares Storm Alliance to groups like La Meute.
Fiset told the Montreal Gazette last May that the groups preach right wing, anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim populism. For its part, Storm Alliance argues that it isn't against Islam itself but merely radical Islam and illegal immigration.
Julie Amarok, an administrator of Storm Alliance's Facebook page, confirmed the attendance Wednesday of several group members.
"We are supporting his cause because, among other things, he supports the right to free expression," said Amarok, who added that Brien is not a member of the group.
Storm Alliance is probably best known for staging rallies at the Lacolle border crossing in response to a recent influx of refugee claimants. Some members wear black masks and clash with counter-demonstrators who frequently outnumber the group.
When the federal government began processing refugee claimants in the Olympic Stadium last summer, Storm Alliance tried to stage a protest outside the sports complex. Sources tell the Montreal Gazette they ultimately cancelled the event because it would also be attended by members of the radical right-wing group Soldiers of Odin (SOO).
Dave Tregget, who founded Storm Alliance in 2016, was also a founding member of the Soldiers of Odin's Quebec chapter. SOO began in Finland and has been linked to European neo-Nazi movements.
One of SOO Quebec's most infamous members - Phil Gendron - has been photographed giving the Nazi salute, wearing SS paraphernalia and has posted Nazi slogans on social media.( https://mtlcontreinfo.org/soldiers-of-odin-a-montreal-la-police-protege-encore-les-nazis/ )
Tregget is no longer a member of SOO and no longer the president of Storm Alliance. Amarok says there is "not a single connection" between SOO and Storm Alliance.
During Brien's address on the courthouse steps, he thanked his supporters for donating $7,166 to his legal defence fund. Beyond affirming his goal to make Quebec an independent nation, he railed against Trudeau's broken promise to reform Canada's electoral system.
He also took aim at the Liberal government's plan to nationalize the Trans Mountain Pipeline.
"I'm inviting all of the patriots of Quebec, all of my friends and comrades ... to take back your membership cards and join the Bloc," he said. "I'm inviting you to become volunteers in Papineau."
The Facebook livestream of his speech was shared 500 times and viewed by 8,400 people as of Wednesday evening. The Bloc Québécois could not immediately be reached for comment to clarify its relationship with Brien.
The Bloc Québécois was once a political powerhouse in Canada - winning 54 seats in the House of Commons to earn its spot as the official opposition party in 1993.
But after nearly being wiped off the map by the New Democratic Party in 2011, the Bloc has been beset with infighting and political defeat. Only five Bloc members remain in the House of Commons.
Brien lives in Papineau and failed to get the Bloc nomination there in 2015.
He is to return to court on Feb. 7.
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/titocurtis( http://twitter.com/titocurtis )
Canadian Press contributed to this report.
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

