It turns out 30,000 tickets - not 20,000( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/20000-of-45000-formula-e-tickets-were-given-away-organizers-say ) - were given away for last summer's ePrix, the non-profit agency running the Formula E revealed Monday.
Formula E, featuring all-electric single-seater cars, was conceived in 2012 as a means to showcase the potential of sustainable mobility. As such, ePrix races are meant to be held where the electrification of transport is needed most - in dense, urban areas, and not on traditional racetracks.
However, the Montreal event held on the eastern edge of downtown last July drew complaints from residents, merchants and motorists during the nearly month-long period of setting up and taking down the temporary circuit.
During her election campaign, Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante promised to move the event from downtown for the remaining two years of the city's contract with Formula E. In December, her administration announced it was pulling the plug altogether( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/in-the-wake-of-bombshell-reports-mayor-to-address-formula-es-future-in-montreal ), saying it was costing taxpayers too much.
In unveiling its final financial results Monday, Montréal c'est électrique (MCE) reported a deficit of $13.55 million, including $8.1 million in promised subsidies the organization never received from the city. If the corporation had received that subsidy, the deficit would only have been $5.45 million - which falls within the original projections, said the organization's director general, Simon Pillarella.
Including the deficit, the debt and the city's $10-million credit line, Montréal c'est électrique spent $20.5 million on the event, MCE spokesperson Patrice Attanasio said.
However, the city spent an additional amount on security, police, communications and logistics, which were not part of the MCE budget. The city's portion of the event also included the controversial concrete barriers embossed with Montreal's logo, which were purchased at a cost of $7.5 million( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/from-formula-e-to-flood-breaks-plante-mulls-recycling-pricey-concrete-barriers ).
Plante told reporters Monday she did not know what the final tally would be.
"We're in the process of finalizing the numbers," she said. "But one of the reasons we pulled the plug is that we needed to stop the hemorrhage."
Reacting to the news Monday, Coalition Montréal councillor Marvin Rotrand said he's disappointed in the event, calling it a financial fiasco, but he's equally upset that it took more than six months for the race's financial details to be made known. He said councillors were stonewalled when they tried to find out how much the city was spending on it because MCE was conceived as a separate corporation and although it was spending public funds, it was not accountable to city council.
"As bad as the loss is in terms of revenue and what this means for the taxpayer, what's even worse is that in a democratic system of responsible government, you are supposed to be responsible to council, and when you do not give the information that councillors have a right to have, you're subverting democracy," Rotrand said.
A total of 45,000 people attended the July 29-30 race, but the overwhelming majority got in for free.
Pillarella told the Montreal Gazette only 15,000 of the tickets were purchased at the box office at full price, while another 15,000 were given away for free, and 15,000 others were given away as part of sponsorship deals with the organization. Still, he said, the race was a success when you compare it with the two-day Formula E event held in New York City that attracted just 18,000 fans.
"I think it was a good achievement for an event that was marketed only six months before and was virtually unknown," Pillarella said. "Formula E has told us the ticket sales were tremendous compared to other cities."
MCE is filing for bankruptcy, with debts of $6.9 million. It owes $6.3 million to the Formula E parent body for licensing, marketing, broadcasting and transportation fees, and another $600,000 to Evenko for fees associated with managing the race. However, since the company has no assets, it can't pay those debts. It will be up to the trustee, PwC Canada( https://www.pwc.com/ca/en.html ), to decide how or if those parties will be repaid, Pillarella said.
It will also be up to the trustee to settle any potential cancellation fees. Formula E, the race's parent body, issued a demand letter to the city and MCE( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/formula-e-organizers-to-take-legal-action-against-montreal ) in December for amounts unpaid, and for breach of contract for cancelling the second and third years of a three-year contract. The final amount owed to Formula E will probably be settled through negotiations between lawyers.
On Monday, Plante said the city doesn't intend to pour more money into the event.
Montreal's Opposition party, Ensemble Montréal, said it had no comments to make about the event on Monday. Spokesperson Olivier Lachance said the party is sticking with its position from December, saying the decision to cancel the race seems justified, but the party would like to know the event's final cost.
jmagder@postmedia.com( mailto:jmagder@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/JasonMagder( http://Twitter.com/JasonMagder )
Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist( http://Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist )
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

