After the storm, the cold.
Following the snowstorm that blanketed the Montreal region Saturday morning, temperatures will dive during the afternoon, falling to minus-14 - with a wind chill of minus-23 - by 5 p.m.
By Sunday at 7 a.m., the thermometer will drop to minus-23 - with a wind chill of minus-31 . Expect sunny skies with a high of minus-18 tomorrow.
Greater Montreal received even more snow than expected - 36 centimetres of snow at Pierre Trudeau Airport - by the time Environment Canada ended its winter storm warning for the Montreal region at 1 p.m.
Travel was difficult because of snowy, slippery roads and reduced visibility throughout the morning, when snow fell at a rate of four to six centimeters an hour, according to meteorologist Julie Deshaies.
Greater Montreal bore the brunt of the storm until about 1 p.m. The snow is expected to continue to fall until late afternoon in the Mauricie, Centre-du-Québec and Quebec City regions. In the Lower St. Lawrence and Côte-Nord regions, it will end around supper time, according to Environment Canada.
Once the snowstorm has passed, you will need to dress warmly. Environment Canada is preparing to issue an extreme cold warning for several regions, including the Laurentians. Cold warnings are issued when the temperature drops below minus-38 degrees including the wind chill.
People try to get car stuck out of snowbank on the service road alongside eastbound Highway 40 near Highway 13 on Saturday morning, Jan. 13, 2018. The Sûreté du Quebec and Urgences Santé are urging people to stay home and off the roads during bad weather that is expected to freeze up after rain and 30 centimetres of snow.
Urgences-Santé is "strongly recommending" that residents of Montreal and Laval stay home this weekend.
Despite that recommendation, paramedics have been very busy since Friday night: more than 200 calls were made to 911 between midnight and 6am Saturday morning - double the normal amount.
Urgences-Santé reminded the public to contact Info-Santé at 811 regarding non-urgent health problems rather than calling 911.
And if you do call an ambulance, you should spread abrasives on slippery surfaces like steps and paths leading to your home, if possible.
In a tweet( https://twitter.com/MTL_Ville/status/952249829450768384 ), the city of Montreal said it was temporarily suspending snow removal to focus on clearing streets.
City buses were way behind schedule in many cases on Saturday morning.
At Trudeau Airport, dozens of arrivals and departures were delayed. Check the Aéroport de Montréal website( http://www.admtl.com/ ) for flight status.
Blowing snow reduced visibility on several sections of Highways 20, 40 and 10. In the Montmagny section of Highway 20 east of Quebec City, visibility was nil.
A number of cars have slid off roads since Friday night, according to the Sûreté du Québec. No serious injuries have been reported.
The SQ called on drivers to exercise caution and has extra officers on hand during the storm.
N.D.G. was still not 100 per cent cleared of snowfall from Monday, Jan. 8, 2018 when this weekend snow began. Here, resident Treena Dickson navigates Wilson St. near Côte-St-Antoine on Thursday, Jan. 11, 2018.
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette

