QUEBEC - Hampstead Mayor William Steinberg's statements comparing Bill 21( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/religious-symbols-quebec-to-table-secularism-bill-caq-will-propose-moving-crucifix ) with ethnic cleansing are "completely unacceptable," and he should apologize and withdraw from the debate on secularism, Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante said Thursday.
But Steinberg was not budging despite the turmoil, issuing a statement on his Facebook( https://www.facebook.com/BillSteinberg/posts/10157111826614605?__tn__=K-R ) page and on Hamptead's municipal page( https://www.hampstead.qc.ca/inside_town_hall/news/mayor_steinberg_statement_on_bill_21 ) explaining his remarks again but not apologizing.
Breaking her silence in the wake of the controversy, Plante issued a statement in which she denounced Steinberg's remarks in the strongest possible terms. She is to meet the media Friday to elaborate further.
"Last Friday, Mayor Steinberg made absolutely unacceptable comments," Plante said in her statement. "These comments have sparked outrage throughout Quebec, with good reason."
"Mayor Steinberg's comments have no place in this public debate. Mayor Steinberg's words and his refusal to apologize have diverted the debate from the proposed law on secularism to become the subject of the debate himself.
"This attitude is irresponsible and must be denounced."
Plante has also urged Steinberg, if he is unwilling to apologize, to scrap his decision to convene a special meeting of the Hampstead council( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hampstead-mayor-says-he-will-not-participate-in-bill-21-protest ) Monday to adopt a resolution saying the town will not apply the legislation.
Plante repeated that since the start of the debate she has emphasized the need to maintain a "healthy debate," but she says Steinberg is not part of it and should stand down.
"I have also reiterated the importance for elected officials to stay above the fray," Plante said.
It was Plante's first comments on the controversy. She issued the statement on a return from a trade mission in South America and after being criticized for not having said a word about one of Montreal island's mayors.
The storm has been raging since a news conference last Friday called to announce a protest against Bill 21 Sunday in Côte-St-Luc.
That was where Steinberg made comments about "ethnic cleansing - not with a gun, but with a law, ( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/hampstead-mayor-should-apologize-for-ethnic-cleansing-remarks-liberal-mna )comments which have been roundly criticized by all of Quebec's politicians, including Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Premier François Legault.
Despite all the pressure, Steinberg has refused to apologize.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/hampstead-mayor-should-apologize-for-ethnic-cleansing-remarks-liberal-mna )
The Steinberg incident also dominated question period and the chatter in the halls of power of the National Assembly, where all party leaders insisted repeatedly that Steinberg backtrack.
Instead, Steingberg added to the storm when he tried to specify he was in no way condoning violence or such genocides as those which took place in in Rwanda or Serbia.
"Since the phrase was ethnic cleansing not with a gun but with a law, a more accurate short description is peaceful ethnic cleansing," he said Tuesday, only making the situation worse in the eyes of other politicians.
In his message posted Thursday, Steinberg said he understand his words were tough for some to digest, but that is as close as he gets to saying sorry.
"I understand that these words are painful to some and it was not my intention to upset anyone, only to have people see the effects of an odious bill," he wrote.
"Sometimes strong words are necessary to open people's eyes."
But his image in the French media has not been aided by his inability to speak French. He has explained it is due to a lifelong hearing handicap. He now has two implants that allow him to hear English, but French is impossible.
In his statement, Steinberg returns to his criticism of the media noting some preferred inflammatory headlines instead of telling the full story. He notes only the Montreal Gazette, National Post and La Presse had "full and fair coverage."
He said he has repeatedly said he does not consider Quebecers racist, but Bill 21 is racist, something Quebecers will realize and reject the law.
But there has been ample speculation that Steinberg's presence and the resulting polarization of the debate over the bill is drowning the moderates on both sides of the issue. Some Coalition Avenir Québec government aides privately have been saying Steinberg is a godsend for Bill 21.
Steinberg has thus become a political football. On Thursday, during the last question period of the week, Legault made sure the story stayed alive another day by launching a blistering attack against interim Liberal leader Pierre Arcand.
He accused Arcand of condoning Steinberg's remarks because Arcand said a day earlier that it is the CAQ's own divisive policies that are sparking such excesses as Steinberg's.
"I will not tolerate that Mr. Arcand and the Liberal Party condone these remarks (by Steinberg), which suggest Quebecers are racist," Legault said.
A day earlier, Arcand said: "What the CAQ does in general is inciting this kind of excess."
Arcand has condemned Steinberg's remarks and called for an apology.
Meanwhile, Steinberg confirmed he will not participate in Sunday's religious freedoms protest (which is taking place outside Côte-St-Luc city hall at 11:30) because he does not want to be a distraction.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/philipauthier( http://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Related
In Hampstead, mixed reactions to mayor's 'ethnic cleansing' remarks( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/in-hampstead-mixed-reactions-to-mayors-ethnic-cleansing-remarks )
Lise Ravary: 'Ethnic cleansing' charge, protest march show disconnect( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/lise-ravary-ethnic-cleansing-charge-protest-march-show-disconnect )

