Only one calèche owner has accepted an offer of $1,000 for former carriage horses( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-offers-1000-per-horse-to-caleche-drivers ) once Montreal's calèche ban takes effect on New Year's Eve at midnight.
"We would have liked to have more than one," said Jean-Franc?ois Parenteau, the executive committee member responsible for carriage horses, at a press conference Monday on the front porch of city hall.
Parenteau said last April that he expected owners of 30 of the approximately 50 remaining calèche horses to take the buyback offer of $1,000 per horse. The horses would be retired to rural settings under a program established in conjunction with Galahad, a horse-rescue organization.
"We expect to get more requests after Dec. 31," he said Monday.
He added that he also hoped the approximately 50 remaining calèche drivers would take advantage of a program to help them retrain for other tourism jobs, for example, as guides for walking tours.
Parenteau said the calèche industry has declined in recent years because of increased public awareness of animal welfare.
He reacted to the news that calèche owner Luc Desparois, president of the Association des hommes et femmes à chevaux, was filing a request for an injunction against the calèche ban by saying owners have had a full year to prepare for the end of the industry.
The city announced in June 2018 that a municipal bylaw adopted that August would eliminate horse-drawn carriages( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-unveils-dog-control-bylaw ), once a familiar sight in Old Montreal and on Mount Royal, by the end of 2019.
Last April, it announced the buyback program for former calèche horses after owners warned that horses would end up going to slaughterhouses if banned from city streets. The $1,000 is more than the $500 to $800 that abattoirs pay for a horse, Parenteau said.
On Monday, he said the fact that only one driver has taken the offer shows that calèche owners intend to carry on their business outside of Montreal, for example at sugar shacks, apple orchards and weddings.
Incidents like horses collapsing in extreme heat have demonstrated that the calèche industry is inhumane, said city councillor and deputy mayor Sterling Downey, who accompanied Parenteau at the press conference.
"With heat waves in the summer, with climate change, with extreme colds in the winter, with construction on the roads, with the amount of vehicles that are on the road, we have a serious question on the animals' safety," he said.
"People have to understand that these animals don't just work in Montreal," Downey added.
Also starting Jan. 1, all cats and dogs in Montreal will be required to be neutered and microchipped. When it comes time to renew a pet's licence, owners will need to submit proof both procedures have been done, Downey noted.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )

