Things you may or may not see unravel in 2013 Anno Domini.
* Yes, there will be a provincial election shortly after the snow
melts.
It will be goodbye McFibber and hello Gerard Kennedy. Timmy Whodat
will lead the Conservatives back to the promised land, but not with
a majority. The Liberals and New Dems just might want to keep Whodat
and Co. in power to punish them. What's that you say? Hey, take
another look at the huge deficit the guy is going to inherit. This
might be a case of wishing you hadn't won.
In Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry, Gentleman Jim will chalk up an
even bigger margin of victory over his closest rival, the NDP
candidate.
The Liberal sacrificial lamb will place a poor third. However, Fern
Guindon will remain the last provincial cabinet minister from the
riding.
* A kind arbitrator, who doesn't have to pick up the tab, will give
firefighters another raise that exceeds common sense in an economy
the private sector is wrestling with. He will reason that this way
the average firefighter will no longer have to hold down an extra
job to make ends meet.
* Confusion over Cornwall's economic climate will continue. On one
hand, the spin out of city hall will paint a rosy economic picture,
but over at the Agape Centre the message will be anything but
pretty. The centre will cite a huge increase, again, in the number
of Cornwall residents coming through the food bank door. At least
three red alerts will be issued during the year as shelves are
stripped bare.
* The National Hockey League lockout will end in 2013, but the jury
is out on whether a deal will be reached in the next month or
sometime during the summer. At this point, the prevailing attitude
among fans is let them stay out.
But you can bet that when the puck drops, we'll all be back on
board. It will be a different story where they call it ice hockey
and professional bowling has a bigger television audience.
* Sewage and water tax (disguised as rates) hikes will continue to
outpace property tax increases. The gap will narrow and in a few
years the sewage/water tax bills could be within a short reach of
property tax bills.
* The David Suzuki gas-guzzling climate change bus will, for the
third straight year, get bogged down in a snowstorm and record
windchill temperatures. And after ocean-front real estate prices
plunge in the wake of Al Gore's prediction of rising sea levels, Fox
News will report that the former v.p. purchased several such
properties at bargain basement prices.
MNBC will report that Gore is taking swimming lessons.
* A pinhead on city council will demand the RCMP be brought in to
investigate an alleged leak after this scribbler announces that when
CAO Norm Levac retires in 2020, Finance Manager Maureen Adams will
be appointed to the position.
* City council will ask the Ontario Provincial Police for a price
on policing Cornwall. However, the OPP quote will be rejected. The
idea of a regional force will resurface but residents in South
Glengarry and South Stormont will be against the proposal pointing
to that fact that the OPP service must be okay.
Otherwise, why do so many city police officers, city firefighters
and city administrators choose to live outside the city.
* * *
IN THE REAR-VIEW MIRROR: Aspirins in a small tin container. ...
When the "country kids" ate lunch at school and city kids, who
walked to school, went home for lunch ... Local hockey monikers that
included Pontiacs, Chevies, Calumets, Avonmore Aces, Ironmen, Long
Sault-Ingleside Combines, Petros, Inkerman Rockets, Maxville
Millionaires, Lancaster Dodgers ... The Dingwall estate at Second
and Gloucester streets ... The old YMCA on First Street, next door
to the Salvation Army Citadel, which was built in 1904 and closed in
1962 when the corps moved to its new citadel at Fifth and York
streets. The Y's gym was an old army hut from the Second
World War training centre ... St. Michael's Academy on Eleventh
Street and the skating rink (natural ice) in the old barn ... St.
Louis de Gonzague School ... Smith Transport depot on Second Street
West ... The ramp on the west side of the Capitol Theatre ... The
Women's Temperance Union fountain in Central Park with basins that
were once used to water horses in the early days. One of the great
crimes against local heritage was the fountain's destruction. ...
Meldum's Funeral Home ... A 59 cent banana split ... Boy Scout old
newspaper drives ... Riding car bumpers in the winter, a "sport"
that was discouraged by the police.
* * *
TRIVIA QUESTION: On Dec. 11, 1976, the largest crowd to see a
sports event in Cornwall crammed into the Ed Lumley Arena. What was
the event? Bonus point if you know the paid attendance.
* * *
TRIVIA ANSWER: The McGill Chair Company was founded by Thomas
McGill. The factory was built in 1905 at York and Third streets with
the help of a $20,000 loan from town council. After falling on hard
times, the factory was closed.
It was demolished in 1942. The property remained a vacant lot until
it was purchased by the First Baptist Church congregation.
The cornerstone for the new church was laid by Olive Diefenbaker,
wife of Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, in November 1960.
* * *
SOCIAL NOTES: The Cat sends greetings from downtown New Orleans.
He's gearing up The Checkered Parrot for the Super Bowl which will
be played at the SuperDome. This will be followed by the world's
biggest street party, Mardi Gras. Throw in New Year's Eve and the
Big Easy has 2013 off to a roaring start ... Got a call the evening
of Dec. 24 from former S-F sports editor/retired Montreal Gazette
sports writer Dave Shoihet wishing me a Merry Christmas. Dave, by
the way, is Jewish and has no trouble wishing his Christian friends
a Merry Christmas.
* * *
GRANDSTAND LIVES ON: The old Athletic Grounds pre-Second World War
grandstand that was wrecked by a wind storm 70 years ago lives on.
Hubert Miron tells us that his two-storey house on Second Street
and another home were built with lumber salvaged from the
grandstand.
The lumber was purchased from the town by two builders from St.
Isidore-- a Menard and a Laframboise -- and used the wood to build
the homes, then in Cornwall Township.
* * *
SPORTS STUFF: Travis Cook, who grew up in Akwesasne and starred for
Frank Benedict's talented junior Braves boxla team in the early
1970s, is president of the National Lacrosse League. ... Scott
Johnson, son of Ron Johnson of Crazy Amigos (Rangatangs), is no
longer the pro at Kanata Golf and Country Club. He has been promoted
to the club's director of golf. He is a graduate of the Cornwall
Golf and Country Club junior program.
CREDIT: CLAUDE MCINTOSH

