It's the daily habit of many cellphone users in London these days.
Check the weather, Facebook, stock market and then right to Victor Mete's latest ice time with the Habs.
There probably should be an app for it.
On Wednesday, the Canadiens made him a healthy scratch against Nashville. That, of course, revived the question hanging over the junior ranks.
Will Montreal send him back to the Knights?
London, wisely, will not say too much about the topic. The club simply wishes him the best and is happy he's living the NHL dream.
They're busy preparing to play Owen Sound today and Guelph Sunday.
But everyone in the OHL knows what it would mean if Mete does end up at Budweiser Gardens again. The Knights will have the best defenceman in the league.
It wasn't a legitimate topic a month ago, when Mete was playing more than 20 minutes a game at the Bell Centre.
But it is now that his ice time has been dwindling and he actually had to sit out and watch while an American league callup got the chance to play.
Ten days ago, Mete had just 10 shifts and 7:06 of ice against Columbus. On Tuesday in Dallas, he clocked in at 9:47.
There are starting to be some suggestions from Montreal media to send Mete first to Team Canada for the world juniors in Buffalo, then back to London for the second half of the season.
But just the other day, the Montreal Gazette ran a Marc Dumont number-crunching column that suggests Shea Weber has been at his best while playing with Mete, the speedy teenager.
So, there is that chemistry to consider in this, too.
The bottom line is, if coach Claude Julien continues to sit out Mete, the only proper course is to return the 19-year-old to London.
No matter what happens, Mete should be proud of what he has achieved.
Before he departed for training camp, he said his goal was to get into an exhibition game with Montreal. He already has played in 22 regular-season tilts.
His success has been one of the better stories in the game this fall, right up there with slight 19-year-old Swedish forward Jesper Bratt, who was supposed to be a Knight, becoming one of the Devils' most productive forwards.
GOALIE CRUNCH: When Joseph Raaymakers refused to report to the Soo this year, Owen Sound appeared to be a possible landing spot. But the Attack had brought in overager Zack Bowman, hoping he would provide what another ex-Sudbury stopper Troy Timpano did in Erie's OHL title-winning season last year. Now, Bowman has left the Attack, after a 3.75 goals against average and .866 save percentage. Big rookie Mack Guzda backstopped Owen Sound to a shootout win over the IceDogs Wednesday, but he's still only 16 years old. The Bayshore squad recalled Riley Daniels, who is 18, from the Kitchener Dutchmen Junior Bs. Looking around, Raaymakers was one of the top remaining goalies available this season. London was compelled to grab him after its poor start, giving the Attack even fewer crease options.
QUICK HITS: The Knights don't know yet if Max Jones will play Friday. The big Ducks first rounder, who missed Wednesday in Sarnia for personal reasons, shared on Twitter that his uncle had passed away . . . Cole Tymkin has been skating and is still day-to-day after being injured in Kitchener. The Knights miss Jones and Tymkin's physical play. . . Even without Mete, Knights fans can watch the OHL's three top-scoring defencemen this weekend. London's Evan Bouchard is third with 25 points, behind the Attack's Sean Durzi and Storm rearguard Ryan Merkley . . . Cliff Pu's failed penalty shot in Sarnia against Justin Fazio was the 15th attempt in the league this season. Ten of those free chances have been granted in the second period, including the Pu try. There have only been three penalty shot goals so far. The netminders are winning . . . Ex-Knight overager Adrian Carbonara, now with Niagara, was suspended eight games for a head check in Mississauga last week. It was just his second game with the IceDogs . . . Brandon Crawley has a goal and is minus-6 in his first 16 games with the American league's Hartford Wolf Pack, the Rangers affiliate. Hartford is right near the bottom of the Atlantic Division standings . . . Max Domi and Zac Rinaldo have the same number of goals (two) for the Coyotes this season. That's unexpected. Here's another: Rinaldo only has one more penalty minute than Domi and three more than the very gentlemanly Christian Dvorak . . . Ex knight Dennis Wideman hired as Kitchener asst coach.
rpyette@postmedia.com
Twitter.com/RyanatLFPress
CREDIT: Ryan Pyette The London Free Press

