Urgences Santé warned Montreal-area residents Sunday not to make unnecessary trips after the region was hit with a mix of freezing rain, ice pellets, rain and snow.
Calls from the public tripled Sunday because of weather conditions, the emergency medical service said in a press release, urging people not to call 911 except for true emergencies.
And conditions could continue to be treacherous Monday, as dropping temperatures and strong winds turn wet surfaces to ice, said Simon Legault, a meteorologist with Environment Canada in Montreal.
"The winds are going to pick up and be very strong," he said.
"It's going to freeze quite fast."
The City of Montreal said on Sunday it has, after consulting with the 19 boroughs, come up with a plan to tackle the difficult weather conditions. The boroughs will focus on spreading salt and abrasives on Monday, which could limit snow removal operations. In addition to salt and abrasives, city workers will make sure to clear all sewers so they are properly draining. The public is encouraged to respect street signs and to be vigilant.
This winter has been noteworthy for heavy snows followed by temperature swings that have drenched the city with rain that quickly turned to ice, turning sidewalks and streets into skating rinks and causing endless challenges for snow-removal crews, Legault said.
"Temperatures have been really swinging. "The highs and lows are very different from day to day," he said.
The weather really has made it difficult to keep streets and sidewalks safe, he said.
"It's real. There's a part that is caused by the weather, which we cannot control. There's a real difficulty with weather this year."
Legault said it would be premature to attribute the yo-yo weather to climate change, since it's not necessarily significant to have constant swings in a single winter.
"This year is a very varying winter for the temperature," he said.
"We just hope it won't be like this next year or the one after."
Dozens of arrivals and departures at Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport were delayed. Travellers were told to arrive three hours early for departures.
There were no widespread power outages aside from an equipment failure that left 268 customers without electricity starting at 2:05 p.m. in Plateau-Mont-Royal. Hydro-Québec had restored service by 3:#0 p.m.
Urgences Santé said people who do have to go outside should exercise caution on slippery surfaces.
Residents should spread abrasives on porches and pathways and make sure their homes are accessible from the outside, it added. People with non-urgent health queries should contact the Info-Santé line at 811, it said.
Environment Canada issued a weather alert Sunday morning warning the mix of precipitation could cause ice build-up and make streets, highways, paths and parking lots slippery and hazardous,( https://www.google.org/publicalerts/alert?aid=1ac04cc54442405c&a=55e7da3&hl=en&gl=CA&source=web )
Rain Sunday afternoon could cause local water accumulation on streets and sidewalks until it changes back to light snow Sunday evening, it said. The snow will continue into Monday, with very strong west winds and temperatures dipping to minus-16 Monday night.
"We could reach around minus-20 on Wednesday morning," said Legault, who noted the normal for this time of year is a daytime high of minus-2 and an overnight low of minus-11.
Ice crampons will be a help as temperatures dive.
"Any water on the ground is going to be freezing," he noted.
Emergency calls for falls on ice are very high this year( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/emergency-calls-for-icy-falls-jump-55-per-cent-in-2019 ).
Environment Canada( https://montrealgazette.com/weather ) is calling for a gradual rise in temperatures starting Thursday.

