Noties, we might not have the same population as NYC, but I'd bet major accessory dollars that on a per capita basis, we're pretty competitive when it comes to the number of events per year. The sheer volume of events that take our party city by storm each social season renders it virtually impossible to cover them all in a calendar year, leading to the sad eventuality that some amazing, inspiring fundraisers get lost in the mix - until, of course, the next year, when we can turn the Social Notes spotlight in their direction, phew!
Foundation vice-president Janet Faith and Westmount Mayor Christina Smith catch up at the Défi Canapé fundraiser.
Which brings us to today's event, the Batshaw Centres Foundation's third annual Défi Canapé fundraiser. While we didn't have the pleasure of this soul-replenishing event experience in 2017, I'm truly thrilled to be sharing the highlights of this year's edition today, along with some significant background about the Batshaw centres and the extraordinary work they do on a routine basis that makes such a course-changing difference in the lives of so many young Montrealers.
TIME TO GET "APPY": Is good food and drink your thing? (Rhetorical question!) Then the Batshaw event at Entrepôts Dominion was the place to be on a still-chilly late March night. The savvy organizing crew behind the Défi assembled an incredibly well-curated array of offerings from some of the most noteworthy eateries in the city, including Bishop and Bagg/Burgundy Lion, Loïc, Mouton Noir, Sumac and Tuck Shop - all well washed down thanks to generous cocktails courtesy of Tavern on the Square and Bierbrier beer.
EVEN COOLER: Each eatery's station featured special "competitive canapés" for guests to enjoy before casting a vote for their fave of the night. And lemme tell you, Noties, the competition was steep. First-place honours eventually went to the Sumac team, who dazzled diners with their succulent lamb kibbeh nayyeh.
Foundation directors and event committee members Liana Thibodeau, Elizabeth Caddick and Janet Faith join event co-chairs Laura Lavy and Tina Khan for a group photo hug at the Batshaw Centres Foundation's third annual Défi Canapé fundraiser.
MORE FÊTE FAB: In addition to the wildly impressive tastebud stimulation, the evening famous for good schmooze and auction bidding didn't disappoint there either. Lots of good laughs were had, and bids and buys were made for a variety of luxury items and experiences (think Air Canada biz-class tickets to anywhere in North America).
Batshaw Centres Foundation directors Laura Lavy, Andrew Clark and Erin O'Brien sport sizable smiles at the Défi Canapé fundraiser.
AS FOR THE CROWD ... well, it was downright fabulous, peppered with the influential and wittily conversational likes of Westmount Mayor Christina Smith; CN vice-president human resources Kimberly Madigan; former Batshaw foundation president Karma Hallward and husband John Hallward; CN's Marc Lemoyne and wife Linda, of Nova Montreal; CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Île-de-Montréal's Assunta (Sue) Gallo, and Katherine Moxness; media relations master Mark Lowe; the sublime Christopher (Kippy) Wiegand, a power partner at Deloitte; Westmount city councillor Mary Gallery; CIUSSS-ODIM board member/foundation president Judy Martin with husband Michael Martin; 3Macs/Raymond James finance wizard Tim Price; foundation vice-president Janet Faith; event committee co-chairs Tina Khan and Laura Lavy; winners of the 2018 Défi Canapé, Sumac's David Bloom and Raquel Zagury; stylish supporters Stephanie and Dan Lavy; personal trainer to the stars Shana Rotstein with husband, GMP Securities' David Perlman; the simply amazing Hana Kim; foundation directors and event committee members Andrew Clark, Erin O'Brien, Liana Thibodeau and Elizabeth Caddick; and proud Batshaw top brass, foundation exec director Michael Udy and Centres director Dave Brown.
TOPPEST TAKE-AWAY: Thanks to generous patrons and event partners like lead sponsor Jarislowsky, Fraser, an impressive and difference-making $75,000 was raised for the foundation. Established in the late '70s, the volunteer-driven non-profit seeks "to help break the cycle of neglect, abuse and failure experienced by many children aged 0-18 years and their families," via its support of the Centres' invaluable programs for Montreal youth facing challenging situations who reside either with their own families, in foster care, in residential placement, or are moving toward independent living.
Bravo, Batshaw!
For more good social, see diaryofasocialgal.com( http://diaryofasocialgal.com/ ).
CREDIT: Jordan Zivitz, Montreal Gazette

