See also: City crews poised to tackle weather
The first severe snowstorm to hit Central Canada will delay air travel Tuesday while motorists faced a morning drive on snow-covered roads.
The storm, which hit Winsdor Monday morning and travelled eastward toward Montreal, left snow, freezing rain and ice pellets after exiting the U.S. Midwest. The accumulated snowfall in some areas was expected to reach between 30 and 50 centimetres by Tuesday morning.
On Tuesday, the storm was expected to push into eastern Quebec and New Brunswick.
Air Canada officials advised Monday night that as a result of continued heavy snow in the Toronto, Ottawa and Montreal regions it planned to cancel or delay more than half its Tuesday morning flights. Travellers can call Air Canada and Canadian Airlines officials for flight information at 1-888-247-2262 before heading to the airport.
Heavy snow warnings were issued by Environment Canada for the area north of Toronto. Snowfall was expected to continue into the night in most areas before tapering off into flurries by Tuesday morning.
The airline expected to resume normal schedules by late Tuesday afternoon and plans to substitute larger aircraft to accommodate stranded passengers. Travellers who reschedule flights will not have to pay change fees.
Pearson International Airport official Peter Greg said that 70 per cent of Monday departures and arrivals were cancelled.
Earlier in the day, an airport spokesman said the airport was as ready as it could be for the storm, and that new equipment in place allows crews to clear snow from runways in a third of the time it used to take.
But passengers weren't made to sleep at the airport overnight.
Laura Cooke, a spokeswoman for Air Canada, said "we secured several hundred hotel rooms in the Toronto area to put up those whose connecting flights were cancelled."
The agency warned people not to travel Monday night as near-blizzard conditions would produce hazardous driving conditions. Temperatures were poised to dip Tuesday.
In other cities such as Windsor, snow started falling at noon Monday but by 5 p.m. had turned to freezing rain, said Cliff Woolcock, maintenance manager for the city. The area had already received about eight centimetres of snow.
Hamilton was hit with snow and freezing rain but a police spokesman said while the city had "a rash of minor accidents", there were no serious incidents.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Midwest got the brunt of the storm.
Chicago's O'Hare Airport cancelled about 75 per cent of its departing flights and housed thousands of stranded travellers. Earlier Monday, a plane skidded off the runway because of the weather. The storm was felt as far south as Texas, with snow possible in El Paso, along the Mexican border.
The storm began as a jet stream hit a cold front sitting over Colorado Monday. The jet stream created a low-pressure area, where Colorado's cold air clashed with warmer air sucked in from Texas and Oklahoma. Fuelled by powerful winds, the whole weather system headed northeast toward the Great Lakes and grew in intensity.
City crews poised to tackle weather
By ALLISON DUNFIELD Globe and Mail Update
Heavy snowfall caused aggravation during rush hour in southern Ontario Monday evening, but no serious problems.
Ontario Provincial Police said that no highways were reported closed as of 5 p.m. EST and there were no major accidents on Monday.
In Windsor, Ont. snow started falling by noon on Monday but by 5 p.m. it had turned to freezing rain, said Cliff Woolcock, maintenance manager.
He said the Southwestern Ontario city had been hit with eight centimetres of snow by 4:30 p.m. and 20 salter plows had been operating on major city routes since 10:30 a.m.
"We hope to get through this by tomorrow morning," Mr. Woolcock said, adding the city's first major storm of the year was supposed to end early Tuesday morning.
In Peterborough, north of Toronto, snow was falling "very lightly" by about 4 p.m. EST, said Greg Hogg, road supervisor for the city. "We don't have anything major as of yet."
However, Peterborough was expected to have up to 25 centimetres. Mr. Hogg said the city's 13 plow trucks, two graters and five front-end loaders are prepared. He said ploughing would likely begin after midnight. "Everyone should be able to get to work tomorrow."
In Kitchener by about 4:30 p.m., only about five centimetres of snow had fallen, Mike Tout, manager of operations, said, adding "it's snowing pretty good right now."
Mr. Tout said that there were a few fender-benders on the Conestoga Espressway expected to get between 15 and 20 centimetres.
Weather problems began Sunday evening in Parry Sound, Ont, the Canadian Press reports. Three people died and one is in hospital after a minivan crossed the centre line and hit a southbound car head-on on Highway 69 near Parry Sound on Sunday evening.
Provincial police in Parry Sound said both people in the car were killed, along with one passenger in the minivan.

