OTTAWA - Joe Rankin was training and teaching at a Maryland middle school, wondering whether another professional football opportunity might come his way, when he got a surprise call recently from Alouettes' general manager Kavis Reed.
It was a week ago Friday night, and Rankin couldn't sleep. He spent much of the night tossing and turning, figuring he wasn't done playing.
"I know I still have juice in the tank. I was wondering when will the opportunity come again?" he said.
He woke up Saturday morning, went to a nearby field to train, returned home and was relaxing when the phone rang not long after. He saw a Montreal area code.
"It was unbelievable. Unexpected. Unheard of. I can't make it up," he said.
Rankin was on the field Monday with the Als and was scheduled to start at field cornerback Saturday night (8 p.m., TSN, RDS, TSN Radio 690) against the Ottawa Redblacks at TD Place.
The Als have been ravaged by injuries to their secondary, losing both Joe Burnett and Mitchell White. That's why they recently traded for defensive-back T.J. Heath and then, subsequently, signed Rankin.
He played six games with the Toronto Argonauts in 2016 after going to training camp the previous season with the Cleveland Browns. In 2014, he attended rookie mini camp with the Baltimore Ravens on a tryout basis.
Rankin was teaching Grade 7 English and world studies at Montgomery Village middle school in Gaithersburg, Md. following his stint with the Argos.
Although the 28-year-old is a modest 5-foot-9 and 185 pounds, he said he won't be encumbered by his lack of size.
"Just play fast and trust your keys," he explained. "Believe and play with your feet. Trust what you see."
Rankin believes his experience with Toronto will help with his transition to life in the Canadian Football League.
"I walk into a situation with a group of guys in the secondary that fly around and believe in each other," he said. "As soon as I stepped in they welcomed me. They've allowed me to play fast and trust my calls."
Saturday night's game will mark the first regular-season return to Ottawa for Als fullback and tight end Patrick Lavoie.
The 30-year-old Lavoie played collegiately at Université Laval before being the Als' second-round (11th overall) draft pick in 2012. He went to Ottawa in the expansion draft before the Redblacks debuted two years later.
"I was surprised. I didn't think it was going to be me. I thought I'd be protected," he said. "You talk about that kind of thing in the locker room. The players said you're going to be safe. I was surprised. After that, it's just part of the business. You go there and play the best you can play.
"I was fine with the idea of playing for an expansion team," added Lavoie, who was reunited with Redblacks GM Marcel Desjardins, the Als' former assistant GM under Jim Popp. "I was happy that a team wanted me that much.
"We did something great here. We started something."
Lavoie, 6-foot-2 and 240 pounds, played four seasons with Ottawa, reaching the Grey Cup twice and winning one championship. Then, last January, he was traded back to the Als for J.C. Beaulieu, another fullback and tight end, although one who's younger and earns less money.
"They saved $30,000 and flipped one for one," Lavoie said. "That's fine. It was a business decision. I understand. No hard feelings."
Although the Als have a 1-6 record, Lavoie said the mood on the team and inside the dressing room remains high, the players are optimistic they'll pull out of their funk, including a four-game losing streak. Ottawa is 4-3 and first in the East Division, but the Redblacks squandered a 24-point third-quarter lead last week at Toronto, were outscored 22-3 over the final period and lost, 42-41.
"The thing is, they (the Redblacks) are not unbeatable," Lavoie said. "I'm not saying we're better than them, but I think they're beatable."
When Ottawa defeated the Als, 28-18, last month at Molson Stadium, Beaulieu opened the scoring with a 47-yard pass-and-run touchdown.
This Monday, Als linebacker and special teams member Nicolas Boulay will head up north to assist with the Kickstart Foundation. He'll be attending a summer camp and playing games with the kids, accompanied by kicker Boris Bede and long-snapper Martin Bédard.
"We're going to have some fun with the kids and just show them a good time," Boulay explained. "A lot of kids, especially these days, they try so hard. Focus on one sport. Go and be a kid.
"A lot focus on trying to grow up and being an adult now. You forget to have fun as a kid. Especially with social media. It's forcing kids to grow up even faster instead of enjoying the moment."
Boulay, who has always been heavily involved in charitable work, is in his fourth season of operating Club 52 in conjunction with the Alouettes Foundation. Each home game, he invites 52 underprivileged youths under the age of 18 to Molson Stadium. Along with their game ticket, they receive a pre-game Subway sandwich and get to meet Boulay and some of his teammates post-game for an autograph session.
More than 1,500 have participated since its launch.
And finally, if former Als defensive co-ordinator Noel Thorpe looks like a shadow of his former self, it's because he's lost 25 pounds by eliminating sugar, carbs, grains and starches. Once 205, Thorpe now comes in at a svelte 180.
Thorpe, who was fired along with head coach Jacques Chapdelaine last September by Montreal, now is the Redblacks' DC.
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1
Related
Als' Johnny Manziel getting used to being in the eye of CFL media storm( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/als-johnny-manziel-getting-used-to-being-in-the-eye-of-cfl-media-storm )
Patrick Lavoie returns to Alouettes in fullback switch with Redblacks( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/patrick-lavoie-returns-to-alouettes-in-fullback-switch-with-redblacks )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

