"I just love Hudson in springtime," mused a joyful Clint Ward recently. "Here we are, barely into June and, already everything is in bloom, and that includes the arts. Everything is ready."
Ward is a longtime volunteer whose grasp of the local scene is as firm as anyone I know. The other day, he and I were sharing BLTs at the Carousel lunch counter in the centre of town where, between bites, Ward was also flipping through a makeshift listing of up-coming arts and cultural events and commenting on what a wonderful adventure we had awaiting us.
On Thursday, June 6, everything begins for real. That's whenArts Alive! Hudson( https://www.villagetheatre.ca/events/arts-alive-2019/ )launches its fourth consecutive community spring festival. Over the next week our town will be buzzing as a broad variety of arts and cultural groupings step up to show their stuff.
The extravaganza begins Thursday night with Hidden Gems, local musicians and friends bringing their open-ended program to the Village Theatre stage. Fee: $20, proceeds to Red Cross flood relief initiative.
As Friday is Movie Day, our local film society has selected Wild Rose, a stunning off-shoot product of Scottish cinema. This beautifully crafted motion-picture tells the story of a young Scottish lass - a single-mother who calls herself Rose-Lynn - who is determined to make it in Nashville as a country music star. Variety calls it a "richly, stirring human story," and describes the lead, Jessie Buckley's performance as bearing "an incandescent star-is-born glow." Tickets $15; Screenings at 2 and 8 p.m.
The weekend offers a potpourri of everything from "wrapping cloths" at Gallery Plus with the Hudson Crafts Group on Saturday 10 a.m.; to a 2 p.m. Hudson Players Club reading of a Chris Gobeil play-in-progress entitled For the Love of Shakespeare at Village Theatre; to a 4 p.m. gathering back at Gallery Plus in time for Hudson author David Langlois' launch of his new book, Courage and Innovation, an in-depth study of the men and women who created Canada's Airport Authorities.
The day ends with the sound of laughter as comedian Joey Elias and friends( https://www.villagetheatre.ca/events/joey-elias-and-friends-june-8/ ) takes over Saturday Night at the Village Theatre at 8 p.m.
Sunday programming begins at 10 a.m. with 5 Minute Theatre, an opportunity for youngsters 9-15 to sample the joys of performing on stage. A Chamber Music concert at St. James Church follows at 4 p.m., while over both days the Greenwood Centre for Living History( http://www.greenwood-centre-hudson.org/ ) has highlighted an eclectic new exhibit entitled A Stitch in Time showcasing Greenwood's many textile treasures.
Monday evening, 7:30 promises another Film Night, this time drawn from the Haida folk-tradition. Called Sgaawaay K'uuna (Edge of the Knife) it is a singular masterpiece, no matter its spoken language.
Arts Alive wraps up on Wednesday evening at Hudson Village Theatre( https://www.villagetheatre.ca/ ) with Greenwood's Pre-Story Fest presentation of acclaimed author Jennifer Robson's recent novel The Gown, a fictional peek into the making of Queen Elizabeth's II wedding gown.
And with that Arts Alive! Quebec signs off for another year, confident it has met its goal as this maverick patchwork quilt in celebration of the arts. Take it in if you get the chance.
For information and tickets, contact Hudson Village Theatre at http://www.villagetheatre.ca( http://www.villagetheatre.ca ).
- Bill Young is a longtime Hudson resident
Related
Hudson musicians band together to raise money for flood victims( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/off-island-gazette/hudson-musicians-band-together-to-raise-money-for-flood-victims )
Kramberger: Take advantage of services your municipal taxes are funding( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/kramberger-take-advantage-of-services-your-municipal-taxes-are-funding )
More from Bill Young, Special to the Montreal Gazette( https://montrealgazette.com/author/bill-young-special-to-the-montreal-gazette )

