MONTREAL -- When Mario Ballerini's wife went to bed at midnight on Tuesday, the street was dry in front of his house in Montreal's Pierrefonds-Roxboro borough, despite the torrential rains that fell Monday.
By 3 a.m. his neighbour was banging on the door of the De Gaulle St. home to say the water from the Riviere-des-Prairies was rising around their homes at the rate of a foot an hour, and he had to get his cars out of his garage to save them. By the morning, there was more than three feet of water in his finished basement.
Ballerini joined his neighbours Thursday in surveying the damage done to their homes and taking stock of their lives after the worst flooding in 43 years hit their neighbourhood, about a kilometre west of where St-Charles and Gouin Blvds. meet. Some used rowboats to get to their homes, or get their kids to school.
Ballerini, who opened his basement door Thursday to find his fridge floating in four feet of rank brown water and his couches submerged, says he is one of the luckier ones -- he's fairly certain he's insured. His insurance company is so busy they're only sending someone out on Monday.
Ballerini's riverfront house is about 120 feet from the water. At the end of his lawn is an eight-foot high stone wall, and a small beach on the other side, beyond which the water lies. This year, the river rose over the eight-foot wall, ran all the way up his sloped backyard and into his basement.
Some of his neighbours say they are not insured, because they're in a once-in-20-years flood zone, and have the spectre of paying out of pocket to repair mould-infested basements soaked in filthy water.
"This is not easy for us because we are retired," said Carole Grimard, who lives four houses up from the river in a home she's spent the last 20 years renovating, adding a second storey a while back so their daughter could live with them. The water came in from the river with such force in the middle of the night it caved in the bottom of their ground-level garage door, ruining the electric tools her husband stores there. But they were able to save their cars and motorcycle because a tow-truck driver from the local American Auto Centre took their vehicles out for them in the middle of the night - free of charge. ("Please mention them," Grimard says.)
Grimard's insurance company told her she was not covered. Blessedly, they have an unfinished basement, but the flood marks on the side of her trim blue-and-white home show the water Tuesday night came to within six inches of her ground floor. She's worried about Friday, but there's little she can do. The pumps can't work fast enough to empty her basement. Large-sized pumps brought in from the city were able to lower water levels in the street during the last days.
Local security officials and firefighters like Gilles Henri, who normally works out of a station in Town of Mount Royal but is now working on a rotating schedule in Pierrefonds-Roxboro with fellow firefighters from Anjou and Montreal North, were busy installing pumps in some residents' homes and checking the generators running them day and night to refill them with gas. Most are flooded, he said, with the exception of a new house built by the contractor who owns it. His foundation is waterproof and his basement dry, despite the fact his house is sitting in the middle of a small lake.
The water levels in the street had dropped a bit because of the drier conditions Wednesday and Thursday, but residents busy sandbagging their homes and pumping out their basements worried the forecast for heavy rains means their relative relief will be short-lived. Some residents haven't been able to use their toilets and showers for days, due to fears of water backing up.
Andrew Szyngiel, whose father built the house he has lived in since he was born in 1968, was busy rowing neighbours kids, household items and occasionally journalists to and from his home Wednesday and Thursday. His father bought the boat in 1978, after earlier severe flooding. Insured? Maybe, he said. Not sure.
Many of the neighbours place the blame for the flooding on the Carillon Hydro-Quebec power generating dam upriver on the Ottawa River, saying officials chose to open the chutes to spare people upstream, at their expense.
Ballerini's wife wants him to sell the place. After a fire and a break-in last year, she think's it cursed.
"There's ghosts in this house," she says. "For me, it's not so bad. There's worse things that can happen in life."
But, acknowledging he has insurance, he adds: "I'm one of the lucky ones."
rbruemmer@postmedia.com
twitter.com/renebruemmer
CREDIT: Rene Bruemmer Montreal Gazette

