Updated throughout the day on Friday, Nov. 20. Questions/comments: ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Hospital capacity could be surpassed outside Montreal
Canada could see 60,000 daily cases by year-end, projections show
Quebec allows Christmas parties over four days, adjusts holiday breaks for students
Province will not allow Hanukkah or New Year's Eve parties, Legault says
Trudeau will conduct briefings back at his home as cases surge
Here's where Montrealers can get tested today
Sign up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter
10:45 a.m. Resto resilience: How chefs are combatting the second wave
With lowered revenue, ongoing expenses and government subsidies dwindling, you won't hear a lot of restaurants say they're doing wonderfully these days.
And yet, plenty of places are innovating, offering everything from heat-and-serve tasting menus to comfort food classics for takeout and delivery.
Read our full story, by Amie Watson.
Chef-owner Aaron Langille makes a duck breast ham with fermented cabbage and homemade ketchup on hotteok-inspired bread sandwich at his Le Diplomate restaurant in Mile Ex.
10:15 a.m. Hospital capacity could be surpassed outside Montreal by mid-December
With cases on the rise, there is a risk that hospitalizations outside Greater Montreal could exceed hospital capacities over the next month.
That's one of the conclusions of the latest weekly projection by public health researchers at the Institut national d'excellence en santé et en services sociaux.
"The data suggest a less marked increase in hospitalizations than expected in Montreal and adjacent regions, so hospital capacity overruns are not expected in these regions for the next four weeks," the institute said this morning.
"However, in other regions of Quebec the increase in projected hospitalizations is higher. Thus, a risk of exceeding capacities cannot be excluded, in particular because of outbreaks observed" in seniors' residences.
"Although the situation has been fairly stable over the past few weeks, increasingly high risks of hospital capacity overruns are starting to emerge, especially in certain regions outside of Montreal," Health Minister Christian Dubé said.
"With the holidays ahead, it remains crucial to be even more disciplined and to do everything to further protect the most vulnerable.
"The situation remains under control, but our room for manoeuvre is thinning, and that is why I invite the entire population to redouble their efforts for the coming weeks."
#COVID19 Données au 17 nov : @INESSS_Qc montre une ?? de 27% du risque des hospit. On prévoit ainsi que les capacités hospit. pourraient être dépassées à la mi-déc. hors du Grand MTL. On doit continuer nos efforts pour éviter d'atteindre cette capacité.
- Christian Dubé (@cdube_sante) November 20, 2020
9:50 a.m. Cases are soaring in Canada
These charts are from a document the Public Health Agency of Canada published this morning.
They show the current situation in Canada, longer-range forecasts and a comparison with other countries.
9:40 a.m. Canada could see 60,000 daily cases by year-end, projections show
From The Canadian Press:
Canada's chief public health officer says there's "urgency" to bringing infections down as officials released dire new forecasts indicating that COVID-19 case counts have far surpassed levels seen during the first wave.
Dr. Theresa Tam says COVID-19 cases could skyrocket to 60,000 per day by the end of the year if Canadians increase their contact rates.
The modelling predicts that at current rates of contact, Canada is careening towards a surge of more than 20,000 cases per day by the end of December.
But if socialization increases, the projections indicate that as 2020 draws to a close, Canada could see twelvefold increase from the current level of around 5,000 cases per day, which is already straining the health-care system in some regions.
The forecasts predict that at current rates Canada's case total could land between 366,500 and 378,600 and the death toll could fall between 11,870 and 12,120 by the end of the month.
Currently, Tam says an average of 4,800 cases are being reported daily - about a 15 per cent increase compared to last week.
The data says the percentage of people testing positive has increased to about 6.5 per cent, above the World Health Organization's benchmark of five per cent.
Tam says this could indicate that Canada is not testing enough, and is a clear sign that the spread of the virus is accelerating.
Tam says there are about 52,000 active cases in Canada to date, with a cumulative tally of more 315,000 cases.
Still, Tam says that amounts to less than one per cent of the population that has tested positive, meaning the vast majority of Canadians are still susceptible to infection.
9:30 a.m. Quebec allows Christmas parties over four days, adjusts holiday breaks for students
Late yesterday afternoon, Premier François Legault announced Quebec's pandemic Christmas plan
People will be allowed to congregate in groups of 10, be they family members or friends, from Dec. 24 to 27.
And there will be some remote learning for students before they go on their Christmas break, and high school students will get an extra week off in January.
Reporter René Bruemmer has the details in our full story
Columnist Allison Hanes, for her part, writes that in attempting to accommodate every family scenario, "there is a risk of encouraging overindulgence we will all pay for in the new year."
9:25 a.m. Quebec will not allow Hanukkah or New Year's Eve gatherings, Legault says 9:20 a.m. Trudeau will conduct briefings back at his home as cases surge
To underscore the importance of minimizing contacts, today Prime Minister Justin Trudeau will conduct a news conference outside his home, Rideau Cottage - the site of his daily briefings during the first wave of the deadly pandemic last spring.
Read our full story.
9:15 a.m. Here's where Montrealers can get tested today
Montrealers can be screened at test centres across the island.
You can check screening clinic wait times here
8:45 a.m. Canada saw 4,600 new cases, 79 deaths yesterday
This was the situation across Canada as of last night, according to the Canada COVID-19 Situational Awareness Dashboard.
8:30 a.m. Sign up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter
Stay informed with our daily email newsletter focused on local coronavirus coverage and other essential news, delivered directly to your email inbox by 7 p.m. on weekdays.
You can sign up here
ariga@postmedia.com
Read my previous live blogs here
Related
Coronavirus updates, Nov. 19: Quebec allows 10-person Christmas gatherings, extends high school break by one week
Coronavirus updates, Nov. 18: Quebec considers extending school break as Ontario scraps idea

