Things are going from bad to worse for snow clearing in the city's most populous borough.
By Wednesday afternoon, Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce had cleared the least amount of snow in the city after Saturday's snowfall of 36 centimetres( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/here-we-go-again-montreal-blanketed-by-another-winter-storm ). Only 52 per cent of the snow was removed in the borough, compared with the city-wide average of 69 per cent, according to the city's website( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement ).
While broken-down trucks were to blame for last week's slow-removal operation, this week's delays are being blamed, in part, on a snow dump that has too much snow.
One of three sites used by the borough to deposit snow taken from its streets was closed to the borough.
Borough mayor Sue Montgomery said she was told Wednesday their trucks are no longer permitted to dump snow at the site near the Angrignon Mall in LaSalle because it is nearing its capacity for the season.
"We can't dump any snow there until it melts," said Montgomery, a former journalist at the Montreal Gazette.
She explained that the dump remains open to the borough of LaSalle because that is its only snow dump. The central city ordered C.D.N.-N.D.G. to avoid the Angrignon dump, Montgomery said.
The borough's trucks filled with snow have had to detour to the dump located in St-Michel, adding significant time to the trip. After leaving the St-Michel site on Tuesday night, the trucks got stuck in traffic because of a snow-removal operation on the Metropolitan Expressway, Montgomery said.
She said the detour and the traffic problems have significantly slowed down the borough's snow-clearing operations.
Some adjustments have been made.
Normally, trucks in the western portion of the city collect snow during the day and night (because that's the only part of the borough where the city's own blue-collar workers clear the snow), and snow removal in the rest of the borough is done by private contractors who only work overnight.
"From now until Saturday, (the private contractors) are going to be working during the day (as well), so hopefully they'll be all done by Saturday," Montgomery said.
She added that the amount of snow that has fallen in such a short period of time is unprecedented, so it is posing many challenges to the borough's crews.
According to Environment Canada's data, 69 centimetres of snow has already fallen( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-wild-winter-heightens-urge-to-hibernate ) this month, added to 61 centimetres that fell during the month of December for a total of 130 centimetres since the season began.
Montgomery is appealing to citizens to have patience with the process and to help each other out. She has reached out on Facebook( https://www.facebook.com/sue.montgomery.750/posts/10159540537740467 ) asking anyone with mobility issues who needs help shovelling their driveways or walkways to post on that site. She has also offered her own driveway to anyone with mobility issues who needs to get to the MUHC superhospital or the Queen Elizabeth Health Clinic near her home.
"I've offered to go out and shovel for people, and some others have, too," she said. "I'd like to start a neighbourhood brigade of volunteers for people who would step up and do that."
Residents of the city's most-populous borough complained last week( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-is-at-the-bottom-of-the-snow-clearing-heap-st-leonard-on-top ) that Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce was one of the slowest to clear snow after about 27 centimetres fell during the first 11 days of the year. The borough had not yet completed snow clearing when a storm overnight Friday into Saturday dumped 36 centimetres. Among the complaints were that snow clearing in front of schools seemed to lag behind some more minor streets, making it more difficult to drop off children at some schools.
Montgomery said she's working with the borough's team to figure out how to improve the snow- clearing operation after future storms.
jmagder@postmedia.com( mailto:jmagder@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/JasonMagder( http://Twitter.com/JasonMagder )
Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist( http://Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist )
Related
Montreal cloaked in smog, clogged with snow as clearing operations continue( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-cloaked-in-smog-clogged-with-snow-as-clearing-operations-continue )
N.D.G. is at the bottom of the snow-clearing heap, St-Léonard on top( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-is-at-the-bottom-of-the-snow-clearing-heap-st-leonard-on-top )
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

