With lowered revenue, ongoing expenses and government subsidies dwindling, you won't hear a lot of restaurants say they're doing wonderfully these days. And yet, plenty of places are innovating, offering everything from heat-and-serve tasting menus to comfort food classics for takeout and delivery. (There are undoubtedly sociologists studying the correlation between COVID lockdowns and fried chicken as we speak.) Then there are multi-brand ghost kitchens, chefs launching meal kits, online marketplaces and a number of new Quebec-born contactless payment startups, which tend to cost less for restaurants than larger delivery apps.
At Le Diplomate in Mile Ex, Chef Aaron Langille's $13 to $15 Korean-spiced pork, duck and onion confit and tempeh asada sandwiches on homemade chewy and crunchy pan-fried bread are seeing steady lunchtime traffic. But with fewer people buying wine to go this lockdown than last, he's looking to extend his dinner menu. "Someone getting food at night, they're more inclined to get a bottle of wine than somebody getting a couple of sandwiches at lunch," he says.
He's also hoping the government will start allowing restaurants to sell wine with delivery through third-party apps like Quebec startup Eva. For now, they can only offer alcohol with delivery if they deliver it themselves. "I could hop into a Communauto and drive a case of wine over to somebody, and I'm very happy to do that!" Langille said half-jokingly.
A duck breast ham with fermented cabbage and homemade ketchup on hotteok-inspired bread sandwich with a selection of wines at Aaron Langille's Le Diplomate restaurant in Mile Ex.
His expanded menu paired with wine delivery would be a tiny pivot, but he doesn't see the point in wasting money on more elaborate changes, since restaurants don't know if they'll be welcoming guests inside again anytime soon.
Devon DeSousa of Mile End all-day breakfast spot Fabergé is also holding out hope for a return to in-restaurant dining. "We're not trying to create a new concept and put in all the work to switch it back again," he says. But he's hedging his bet by adding a $6 pickup-only menu (breakfast sandwiches, cheeseburgers and smoothies), offering free coffee (BYO-mug) and slowly onboarding multiple delivery and online ordering services with the hopes of adding five to 10 orders a day. "If we just sell a couple hundred dollars more (per week), we're going to stay afloat," he says.
Meanwhile, John Zamptoulakis, co-owner of mom-and-pop shop Kokkino Café in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, says he's too small for delivery. He's not sure what will happen come winter. "I'm waiting to see what Justin (Trudeau) can do for me. I'd love to close down for three months, because there's no point in staying open when there's no one walking in the street because it's too cold."
For now, he's planning to add roasted vegetables and frittatas to the menu for the colder months and they'll always come with a smile and a hello.
Here's what else is happening on the Montreal restaurant scene:
Local online ordering and delivery companies
Some local delivery options have expanded to food delivery, while a number of Quebec-born startups are offering better deals to restaurants on delivery, takeout and contactless payments than some of the bigger players.
Eva is a co-op ride-sharing delivery service that restaurants can contact when needed. CHK PLZ works with Eva for delivery and is an online ordering service like UEAT, Resto Loco, Pizzli and Cluster. Radish is a delivery co-op of restaurants, drivers and consumers that returns profits to members. And La Roue Libre is an electric bike service that charges a flat $5 fee per delivery.
Food courts and food halls
Food courts have it especially tough, as mall and office patronage have declined, but the most successful restaurants have switched to delivery, like Sukiyaki in the Place Montreal Trust with its perfect 5.0 rating on UberEats.
For now, family-owned South Shore Chinese restaurant DollarBouffe is getting by on takeout. Chef and co-owner Jin Song Zhu's homemade Taishanese savoury rice noodle rolls come steamed, stuffed and bathed in soy sauce, for a dish that's warm, salty, soft and completely slurpable.
Family-owned Le Wok in the foodcourt at 1250 René-Lévesque W. closed in March, but recently reopened. Steve Quan, who's operated the counter since 1997, says he saw 80 per cent fewer customers in his first week back than this time last year. He's hoping more people come for his General Tao chicken and salt and pepper shrimp now that his helpful landlord has let the building's tenants and remaining office workers know that he's reopened.
The city's gourmet food halls, meanwhile, have created their own apps and joined online ordering systems, so you can get your crispy fried chicken (or faux chicken) with maple sriracha from Ho Lee Chix in Le Central to go.
Ghost kitchens
As with food halls, companies with enough capital are leading the way in ghost kitchens, RD3 Restaurant Group, the group behind Reubens and Deville DinerBar has launched ONE KITCHEN out of the Deville space downtown, combining eight restaurant concepts with no actual dining room. Reubens and the revamped Deville have been open for delivery from the space since early November. The remaining six concepts (burgers, pizza, desserts, salads, chicken and Greek street food) are opening over the course of the month. According to Anthony Tzemopoulos of RD3, the plan is to expand to Brossard, Laval and elsewhere in 2021.
Meanwhile, up in St-Laurent, the Q-ZN kitchen that Gazette columnist Bill Brownstein has written about is uniting separately owned restaurants - rather than multiple brands from the same company - under one ghostly roof.
New Restaurants
Undeterred by the pandemic (or not in a position to wait), some restaurants have recently opened, including:
Rubie's, former Chefs! - la revanche winner Hakim Chajar's restaurant serving gluten-free fried chicken out of Miel in Pointe-St-Charles
Le Canting, a Chinese, Taiwanese, Shanghainese and Malaysian comfort food place, also in Pointe-St-Charles, from a former Bouillon Bilk chef
Le Mariachi, vegan Southern Californian/Mexican cuisine from Masterchef winner Dino Angelo Luciano
Mastard from Simon Mathys, formerly of Manitoba, which should open in December
Fleurs et Cadeaux, a Japanese snack bar and sake shop with Chef Tetsuya Shimizu 's bento boxes, chirashi and curries that come with QR code playlists
Manoubia, a Tunisian/Spanish from the owners of Le Dépanneur Café
Chung Chun, a Korean hot dog chain with sausages and mozzarella dogs dipped in rice flour batter and fried like pogos. It's set to open Nov. 25.
Parliament Pub and Parlour chef Chanthy Yen opened Touk, a Cambodian popup, in May. It was supposed to last only until November, but has proven so popular, Yen hopes to open a permanent location if Montreal returns to indoor dining soon.
Special mention goes to Touk, the Cambodian popup from Parliament Pub and Parlour chef Chanthy Yen that opened in May. It was supposed to last only until November, but his Khmer curry with hand-crushed kroeung spice paste and Mee Kola steamed rice noodles with soy-pickled egg, marinated vegetables and Nordic shrimp have proven so popular that Yen hopes to open a permanent location if Montreal returns to indoor dining soon.
Fine Dining at Home
A lot of Montreal restaurants have adapted to be more travel friendly or casual, like Pastel on UberEats with its $50 table d'hôte and $15 cubano sandwiches, and Danny St-Pierre with his Detroit-style pizza in St-Lambert. Others require customers to prep, plate or reheat each dish themselves, like the $175 takeaway tasting menu for two from Le Mousso or the à la carte options from Hoogan et Beaufort and L'Express. (Don't worry, there are instructions.)
Many have launched their own online marketplaces of appetizers, mains, desserts, pantry staples and discovery boxes, like Chez Victoire with its $65 four-course boxed set menus for two - think celery remoulade with truffle, pear and foccaccia; tuna tataki; risotto; and vanilla pannacotta. It's also selling T-shirts, hats and litres of homemade Bolognese and chilli in its online boutique. Wine lovers will appreciate the 30 per cent discount on bottles, which drops a 2014 Philippe Pacalet chardonnay from $225 to $157.50. For more budget-friendly imbibing, the fizzy red bubbles of the $42 Cinque Campi lambrusco will add ebullience to your takeout $10 sous vide steak.
Chef-Driven Food Boxes and Meal Kits
What do chefs do with time on their hands? They contribute to Les Weekendeurs' custom food boxes, which include affordable dishes from reputable restaurants and chefs, along with honey, maple syrup and spice blends from local companies. They also start their own chef-prepped meal kit boxes, like Mise en Place, the brainchild of Chef Danny Smiles, where subscribers follow along with videos of Danny preparing each high-quality meal himself, from salmon puttanesca with sautéed rapini to vegan shepherd's pie with watercress and endive dijonnaise. Delivery is included for both.
Sweet Endings
Juliette et Chocolat owner Juliette Brun didn't expect to spent the first COVID lockdown doing Instagram and Facebook live events. But when the promotional tour for her cookbook was cancelled, that's what she did. If you don't feel like making her decadent brownies at home, you can order her hot chocolate, crêpes and even gourmet fondue - complete with waffles, brownies, homemade marshmallows and fresh fruit -for delivery via the Juliette et Chocolat website or third-party apps.
Related
These high-end Montreal restaurants are offering top-notch takeout
For Montreal restaurants, a mixture of skepticism, uncertainty and hope
COVID-19 cost Quebec 42,000 hotel and restaurant jobs in October, study says



