This story was originally published in the Montreal Gazette on Saturday, June 23, 2001.
Sunny Florida was anything but yesterday as thunderstorms lit up the sky and rains pounded the sands of this seaside resort.
It also rained on André Savard's latest attempt to wrest the No. 1 over-all pick in today's National Hockey League entry draft (noon, Sportsnet) from the Atlanta Thrashers.
The Canadiens' general manager refused to confirm he had sweetened his offer for the top pick, but The Gazette has learned that Atlanta GM Don Waddell turned down a package that included young goaltender Mathieu Garon, defenceman Andrei Markov and the seventh over-all pick in today's draft.
"The ball's in their court," Savard said. "It's their pick and they can do what they want with it. We've made what we feel is a good offer, and we're willing to talk until it's their turn and they use the pick."
While Savard said he was actively pursuing the No. 1 over-all pick, he expressed no interest in the second over-all pick that belongs to the New York Islanders.
"It's either No. 1 or No. 7," Savard said.
Russia's Ilya Kovalchuk (left) and Jason Spezza of the Windsor Spitfires are considered the top two prospects heading into the 2001 NHL entry draft.
That's the latest indication that the one can't-miss prospect in this draft is Russian left-winger Ilya Kovalchuk. For most of the past season, there has been a debate over who will be No. 1 - Kovalchuk or centre Jason Spezza of the Windsor Spitfires. But Spezza's star seems to have slipped a notch or two, and Kovalchuk has emerged as the star attraction. There has even been speculation that Kovalchuk will lead a Russian sweep of the top three selections in the draft.
Waddell is so impressed with Kovalcuk that he indicated this week he was 75-per-cent sure he would keep the pick, after saying earlier that he hoped to trade the pick for a young goaltender.
Kovalchuk has been described as self-centred, but he is an imposing figure at 6-foot-2 and 207 pounds, and has impressed scouts with his physical play. He impressed scouts at the world under-18 championship in April, when he had 11 goals and four assists in six games. His scoring feats are enhanced by the fact he led his team in penalty minutes.
"I'd rather have a skilled player who wants the puck and go through guys than a skilled guy who is passive," Waddell said. "In the long run, we feel he's a coachable and strong player."
At a media luncheon to introduce the top prospects, Kovalchuk stood out because he was the one player who seemed certain he would be playing in the NHL next season.
Spezza continued to be the media star, handling interviews with aplomb, but he cautioned that being drafted is only the first step on the road to the NHL.
"I've been working hard six days a week and doing the things I have to do to make it," he said. "But after I'm drafted, I still have to sign a contract and make the team."
Speaking through an interpreter, Kovalchuk said he was looking forward to playing in the NHL and wasn't bothered by the prospect of playing for a losing team.
"In a way, it will be an advantage because I'll have a better chance of playing," said Kovalchuk, whose father played professional basketball in St. Petersburg and now runs a sports school. Kovalchuk grew up idolizing Valeri Kharlamov, a Russian star in the 1972 Summit Series against Canada, and wears his No. 17.
While he expressed a desire to play wherever he's drafted, Kovalchuk indicated he might not be comfortable in Philadelphia. When he asked if he was aware of the slash with which Flyers GM Bobby Clarke broke Kharlamov's ankle in the 1972 Canada-Soviet series, Kovalchuk replied: "Yes, I don't think it was very nice."
While Savard will continue to pursue the No. 1 pick, it appears likely the Canadiens will be content with the seventh, 25th and 37th over-all picks. That means there will be little hope of immediate help.
There has been increasing speculation that the Canadiens are high on Saku Koivu's brother, Mikko.
When asked whether he would like to play with his older brother, Mikko said: "It would be nice. I don't know whether I would be ready before three years, and who knows if he'd still be with the Canadiens then."
When asked if the Canadiens could afford to wait three years for a draft pick to pan out, Savard said Koivu's comments were a reflection of his maturity, and added that most of the players in the draft were two or three years away from the NHL.
"The difference is that a player like Koivu is realistic and knows the work he has to do," Savard said.
While Kovalchuk is the undisputed No. 1, there is growing interest in two other Russians, Stanislav Chistov and Alexander Svitov.
Chistov is only 5-foot-9 and 170 pounds, but his skills are considered to be at an NHL level. When Kovalchuk was asked if Chistov could make it in the NHL, he said: "It's not a question of if he makes it, but when. What he draws (on the ice) cannot be erased."
Meanwhile, the Canadiens announced yesterday they will not offer new contracts to defencemen Josh DeWolf and Barry Richter and forwards Matt Higgins and Mike McBain.
Higgins was their first-round draft pick in 1996.
Savard also said that forward Johan Witehall would play next season in Switzerland.
Help on way for Habs
This story was originally published in the Montreal Gazette on Monday, June 25, 2001.
The Canadiens came away from this year's NHL entry draft with some immediate help for their anemic offence.
And a move designed to strengthen the defence has provided them with the means to deal for some help.
While the Canadiens selected eight players in the annual entry draft, the most significant moves for next season were the acquisition of right winger Andreas Dackell from Ottawa for an eighth-round draft choice and the return of defenceman Stephane Quintal after two years of exile in New York and Chicago. The Canadiens gave the Blackhawks a fourth-round pick for Quintal's rights and signed the veteran to a three-year, $5.1- million U.S. deal.
Dackell represents an immediate upgrade at forward. He has averaged 13 goals a season over the past five years and is a solid two-way performer. He's a bargain with a club option for $1 million next season.
"He's a versatile player who works hard and he fits in well with Joe Juneau," said general manager Andre Savard, who knows both players from their days with the Senators.
While Savard said Quintal's return gives the Canadiens a physical presence they've been missing on the blu e line, it also gives the Habs depth on defence.
There's a saying in hockey that you can never have too many defencemen, but the Canadiens find themselves in that position. The addition of Quintal gives the Canadiens 10 NHL defencemen and they have two prospects on the way up in Ron Hainsey, the club's first-round draft choice last June, and Mike Komisarek, their first pick here Saturday.
"We didn't acquire Quintal to be in a position where we would be able to trade some defencemen, but if someone wants to talk, we have the cards," Savard said. "Our main concern was to get tougher and we've done that with the addition of Stephane. We'll also have Craig Rivet and Sheldon Souray coming back healthy and that will give us a good mix of defencemen who can play the physical game and guys who can help us out on offence and the power play."
One prime candidate for a trade is Patrice Brisebois, who signed a one-year, $2.5-million deal for next season. He is eligible to become a free agent next July.
While Savard said he was happy to have Komisarek, the bruising defenceman from the University of Michigan wasn't his first choice. In fact, he wasn't even the team's second choice.
Savard's first choice was Russian Ilya Kovalchuk, but he was thwarted in his attempt to wrest the No. 1 over-all draft choice from the Atlanta Flames. However, Savard deserves credit for trying.
Atlanta GM Don Waddell said the Canadiens were the most persistent of the 11 or 12 teams that made a pitch for the top pick. The Canadiens' last offer, an hour before the draft, included goaltender Mathieu Garon, defenceman Andrei Markov and both of the Canadiens' first-round picks - No. 7 and No. 25. Savard was willing to sweeten the deal more, but finally got the message that Waddell wanted Kovalchuk as much he did.
Savard also had his eyes on Saku Koivu's younger brother, Mikko, but Minnesota took him one pick before the Canadiens tabbed Komisarek.
None of the players drafted by the Canadiens will provide any immediate help, but Komisarek is the closest. He plans to return to Michigan in the fall for his sophomore year, but Savard is hoping that he will follow the same path of Hainsey, who abandoned the University of Massachusetts at Lowell in April and signed a three-year deal with the Canadiens.
"We'll keep close tabs on him and, if he continues to develop the way we expect him to, we'll see if we can bring him to camp," Savard said.
Komisarek is an imposing 6-foot-4, 225-pounder who grew up in New York. He's a late bloomer who didn't start playing hockey until he was 11.
"I played soccer and baseball, but I liked hockey right away because of the contact," Komisarek said. "I like hitting people."
The Canadiens' other first-round pick (25th over-all) is Alexander Perezhogin, a 5-foot-11, 185-pounder from Avangard Omsk in the Russian second division. Perezhogin was overshadowed by Omsk teammates Alexander Svitov (third pick over-all) by Tampa Bay and Stanislav Chistov (fifth over-all by Anaheim), both of whom played for Omsk's first-division team. But the Canadiens were impressed by his speed and scoring ability - 48 goals in 32 games.
Perezhogin will return to Omsk next season with the Canadiens' blessing. He has been promised a place on the first-division team and will work on his English, which is already better than Markov's.
The most confident selection was Duncan Milroy, a 6-foot, 180-pound right winger from Swift Current in the Western Hockey League. He was selected in the second round (37th over-all) and said he was coming to camp next September "to make the team. I'm not going there with the idea of going back to junior."
While the Canadiens appreciate that kind of confidence, Savard noted that Milroy's skating has to catch up to a good pair of hands, and he's a few years away from the NHL.
The other Montreal picks were:
- Tomas Plekanec: an 18-year-old, 5-foot-10, 189-pound forward from Kladno in the Czech League (third round, (71st over-all).
- Martti Jarventie: a 25-year-old, 5-foot-11, 185-pound defenceman from TPS Turku in the Finnish League (fourth round, 109th over-all).
- Eric Himelfarb: an 18-year-old, 5-foot-9, 160-pound forward from the OHL's Sarnia Sting (sixth round, 171st over-all).
- Andrew Archer: an 18-year-old, 6-foot-4, 195-pound defenceman from the OHL's Guelph Storm (seventh round, 203rd over-all).
- Viktor Ujcik: a 29-year-old, 5-foot-10, 180-pound forward from Slavia Praha of the Czech League (ninth round, 266th over-all).

