Canadiens fans, along with head coach Claude Julien and GM Marc Bergevin, might still be having nightmares about watching the team's power play last season.
The Canadiens' power play was often like a two-minute horror flick - minus the Chucky doll since Alex Galchenyuk was in Arizona - as the club ranked 30th in the NHL with a 13.2 per cent success rate. Only the Nashville Predators (12.9 per cent) were worse.
Bergevin hasn't made any moves during the summer to improve the power play, but one player who might be able to help is Nick Suzuki.
Nick Suzuki during the Montreal Canadiens rookie camp at the Bell Sports Complexe in Brossard on Friday September 6, 2019. Dave Sidaway / Montreal Gazette ORG XMIT: 63086
Suzuki posted 34-60-94 totals in 59 regular-season games last season in the OHL with 11 of his goals and 18 assists coming on the power play. He added three more power-play goals and 10 assists while posting 16-26-42 totals in 24 playoff games with Guelph to earn the Wayne Gretzky 99 Award as MVP and help the Storm win the league championship.
Suzuki will definitely be on the Canadiens' power play at this weekend's rookie tournament in Belleville, Ont., and if he gets a chance there during training camp and the NHL exhibition season it will provide his best shot at making the team.
"I know they were, I think, 30th," Suzuki said on Day 1 of the Canadiens' rookie camp Thursday when asked about the team's power play. "I think I've always been good on the power play. I think I'm a threat (to shoot) and (to) pass at the same time. I think every team I've been on we've always had a good power play, so if I get the opportunity to be on the power play with a lot of the NHL players hopefully we can mesh well."
The Canadiens acquired Suzuki in the Max Pacioretty trade last summer after the Vegas Golden Knights selected the 5-foot-11, 201-pound forward in the first round (13th overall) at the 2017 NHL Draft. Bergevin said Suzuki was the key player in the deal that also brought Tomas Tatar to Montreal.
The general thinking is that Suzuki, 20, needs to improve his speed and physicality before he's ready for the NHL and he will probably start this season with the AHL's Laval Rocket. But the Canadiens also desperately need help on the power play and it's definitely worth giving Suzuki a look.
"He's got a good feel, he's got a good dazzle about him," Rocket head coach Joël Bouchard, who is handling the Canadiens' rookie camp, said Friday when asked about Suzuki on the power play. "He's comfortable. I think one of the things, too, is guys have to be comfortable in some situations.
"He has a good flair, he's got good poise," Bouchard added. "He manages stress very well in situations. Power play, it's like a little bit of baseball. A good power play is 28, 29 per cent. You're failing a lot, but then you're still capable of having those moments where you strike, and he seems to be a guy that can strike on the power play."
Another thing Suzuki has going for him is the fact he can play centre or wing. Bouchard plans to play Suzuki on the wing with Ryan Poehling at centre during this weekend's rookie tournament in which the Canadiens will play the Ottawa Senators on Saturday and the Winnipeg Jets on Sunday, with both games starting at 7 p.m.
Suzuki has worked this summer with renowned skating coach Barb Underhill, who won the world championship in pairs figure skating with partner Paul Martini in 1984, represented Canada at the 1980 and 1984 Olympics and is a consultant with the Toronto Maple Leafs. Underhill's husband, Rick Gaetz, is governor of the OHL's Storm, which is how Suzuki hooked up with her.
"She's great," Suzuki said. "She skates like nothing I've ever seen before. I got to see her figure-skating highlights and she still skates like that. She's been teaching me a new technique that she's been trying to teach all the Leafs. It's just kind of slowing down before you can accelerate. It's blade technique and always being on one foot rather than two."
Underhill also noticed Suzuki needed to improve his ankle flexion and he's been working on that.
"I think that's really helped a lot," he said. "She's pretty mythical."
Suzuki's name will always be linked with Pacioretty following last summer's trade and the former Canadiens captain scored 22 goals in 66 games last season with the Golden Knights, including four on the power play. When Pacioretty scored a career-high 39 goals with the Canadiens in 2013-14, 10 came on the power play.
"It's nice knowing that the team really wants you when they trade for you," Suzuki said. "For them to be trading Pacioretty, a (30-goal) scorer a few times, it's a really big piece for them and for them to really want you in the trade coming back really made me feel good. I just want to prove them right for wanting to trade for me and hopefully have a great career like Pacioretty did."
scowan@postmedia.com( mailto:scowan@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/StuCowan1( https://twitter.com/StuCowan1 )
Related
Stu Cowan: Spotlight shines on Ryan Poehling at Canadiens' rookie camp( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/stu-cowan-spotlight-shines-on-ryan-poehling-at-canadiens-rookie-camp )
Joël Bouchard looking to make Canadiens rookies feel comfortable( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/joel-bouchard-looking-to-make-canadiens-rookies-feel-comfortable )
Stu Cowan: Habs' pick Cole Caufield begins college career with a bang( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/stu-cowan-habs-pick-cole-caufield-begins-college-career-with-a-bang )
Wisconsin hockey a family affair for Canadiens prospect Cole Caufield( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/wisconsin-hockey-a-family-affair-for-canadiens-prospect-cole-caufield )
Canadiens draft pick Jayden Struble commits to Northeastern University( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/canadiens-draft-pick-jayden-struble-commits-to-northeastern-university )

