Life appears easy for the pair of jaguar cubs at the Granby Zoo.
Since being born Aug. 6( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/endangered-worldwide-two-jaguar-cubs-born-at-granby-zoo ), the cubs have had one responsibility: to be each other's playmate. They spend the rest of the day sleeping, or having the scruffy black spots along their dark gold fur cleaned by their mother, Taiama, who's trying to keep them spotless.
The cubs, who have yet to be named, have been under the care of their mother in an isolated nesting area, as she raises them without the interference of her male partner Kuwan or the zoo's facility members. But little do the cubs know, they're also part of a bigger mission.
"We need to continue to increase genetic diversity," says Shannon Ferrell, the chief of veterinary services at Granby Zoo. "If not, we could end up in genetic bottlenecks, where we don't have enough diversity within the population to reproduce and have normal offspring."
Jaguars are "near endangered" because of poaching and deforestation, among other reasons, in such places as the Amazon. According to the World Wildlife Fund( https://www.worldwildlife.org/stories/jaguar-the-amazing-amazon-big-cat ), their "range has decreased by half in the last 100 years ... resulting in reduced and even extinct jaguar populations in some countries."
In Canada, there are 11 jaguars in four zoos. Granby, about an hour east of Montreal, is among 236 zoos that are certified under the Association of Zoos & Aquariums, allowing them to participate in Special Species Programs to aid reproduction of certain animals. The Granby Zoo has 45 species in the program, including the jaguar.
Breeding jaguars isn't easy, Ferrell says, because you need a pair that is compatible, but don't share similar genetics. That's the case for Taiama, 7, and Kuwan, 6, who also produced a litter in 2015.
"We've been asked to reproduce a new litter for three years," says Patrick Paré, the director of conservation and research at the Granby Zoo. "When we have babies, it's because another zoo needs them."
Granby Zoo jaguar Taiama gave birth to these little charmers on Aug. 6, 2019. They are her third and fourth cubs. Photo: Granby Zoo
The most recent cubs are the 43rd and 44th to be born at the Granby Zoo since 1977. They'll eventually be sent elsewhere, just like the pair in 2015, who were sent to zoos in Palm Beach and Philadelphia. Taiama came from Zoo Berlin, while Kuwan came from Seattle's Woodland Park Zoo.
Before the cubs go out to start their own families, they'll be under their mother's care for at least a year.
Guests can see them through a live feed beside their indoor enclosure. Ferrell says the cubs won't go outside till at least the 12-week mark. But the cubs are ahead of schedule in some regards; most jaguars open their eyes after a couple weeks, while Granby's cubs reached that milestone after a couple of days.
The zookeepers haven't touched the cubs. Instead they monitor the video feed, because a human scent could alarm Taiama and lead to her neglecting the cubs. At the six- to eight-week mark, the zoo will perform physical assessments, confirm their genders and vaccinate to prevent such diseases as canine distemper, which can be spread by feral cats or raccoons who enter the premises.
The zoo will keep the cubs and mother separated from the father. It's to prevent potential accidents, but it's also uncommon for the father to interact with his cubs in the wild. In a year, the mother might also become tired of her cubs.
The mother and cubs are currently in one of two ancillary rooms. When Taiama needs to exercise, the zookeepers open her door, leading to an underground enclosure that can be seen by the public through a window. But before that happens, the zookeepers make sure Kuwan doesn't have access.
Kuwan, father of two jaguar cubs at Granby Zoo, takes it easy. He hasn't met the babies, because in the wild it would be uncommon for him to interact with them.
Kuwan spends his time in the main area, consisting of grass and a few trees with a small pool of water to bathe and drink. There's also a high perch, much as they prefer in the wild.
To understand the species, the Granby Zoo collaborates with the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary and Jaguar Preserve in Belize, which aims to protect the animals and their environment. The jaguar can live in various ecosystems. They've been seen in Arizona's deserts, but they're most commonly found in tropical forests such as throughout the Amazon, which is currently in danger.
"For sure there is an impact, one that will be discovered for decades," says Paré, referring to the wildfires that have been devastating the Amazon forest for weeks( https://montrealgazette.com/news/national/brazil-bolivia-assessing-needs-after-canada-offers-15m-aid-for-amazon-fires/wcm/98e962d3-5572-4cf4-a092-78979aa8182d ). "It'll force jaguars to leave the forested areas and move closer toward human habitations."
As apex creatures, jaguars can be viewed as "umbrella species," Ferrell says. If jaguars aren't doing well, it means that the species and plants at the bottom of the ecosystem's apex can no longer support having a high level predator in the environment.
"Zoos are unfortunately becoming the last stronghold of animal diversity," says Ferrell. "Our jaguars won't enter the wild. But when the necessity is really there to have more in the wild, hopefully we'll have built up the genetic diversity to help."
Shannon Thomas Ferrell, chief of veterinary services, left, and animal technician Nathalie Marois watch the video feed of two jaguar cubs born in August 2019 at Granby Zoo.

