Catch up on all the big stories that happened this week in Montreal.
The COVID-19 vaccines are in Quebec. Now what?
Experts are celebrating the start of Quebec's COVID-19 vaccination campaign, but they also warn that the benefits of the vaccine won't be apparent for some time. "I think we should be ecstatic," said Dr. Donald Sheppard, chair of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology in McGill's Faculty of Medicine. "I think it is very clear that the only exit strategy for us to get back to normal life will be vaccination," he said. "It's the only way we're going to protect the vulnerable people in our community, the elderly and those with chronic medical conditions." But the first inoculations are unlikely to have any immediate effect on the number of hospitalizations and deaths.
Quebec to close non-essential businesses over the holidays to help curb COVID-19
In what it's describing as a needed "holiday pause," the Quebec government announced a series of restrictions Tuesday aimed at curbing the spread of COVID-19 in the province. The measures will include closing non-essential businesses as of Dec. 25 and keeping elementary schools closed an extra week, until Jan. 11, with some distanced learning options available. At a news conference Tuesday, Premier François Legault said the government had no choice but to act given the rising number of daily cases and the pressure the province's hospitals are under. Legault said businesses deemed non-essential will be closed until at least Jan. 11. Grocery stores, pharmacies, pet shops and hardware stores will remain open, as will the province's liquor (SAQ) and cannabis (SQDC) stores.
Legault opens door to Canadiens games at Bell Centre this season
Quebec Premier François Legault put on his hockey-fan hat Wednesday and said he would welcome the resumption of National Hockey League action in mid-January. "If it takes place in mid-January - I hope so, to be quite honest - I think it's entertainment that is very popular in Quebec," Legault said during his daily news conference. Legault also said he was looking forward to the Canadiens playing in a proposed Canadian Division. "Obviously, with the financial means that NHL teams have, they can put in place measures to protect players," said Legault. "Unlike garage leagues, they are capable of creating bubbles."
Bonjour-hi T-shirts a big boon to the Montreal Gazette Christmas Fund
Merci-thank you. That seems to be the most appropriate response to broadcaster Aaron Rand and fans of the satirical "bonjour-hi" T-shirt he created. The popular CJAD host presented a cheque for $8,655 to the Montreal Gazette Christmas Fund Thursday - proceeds from the sale of the shirts this fall. The T-shirt is Rand's latest salvo into the field of linguistic politics in Quebec. It says "bonjour Hi!" with a thumbs-up and the words "approuvé OQLF approved" underneath. Five hundred of them have been sold since Rand launched the line in November. Rand told Gazette columnist Bill Brownstein he had been galvanized to act after hearing Michel Leblanc, president and CEO of the Chamber of Commerce of Metropolitan Montreal, say the expression "bonjour-hi" was offensive when used by local merchants. "Here's the guy responsible for trying to help hard-hit businesses saying that," Rand told Brownstein. "I had really hoped and prayed the bonjour-hi debate was over, but noooo. It's such a simple and unnecessary thing to bring up again."
Will 2020 be a white Christmas in Montreal? Don't bet on it
It probably won't be a white Christmas, and that's something Montrealers should get used to. "There's still some uncertainty, so I wouldn't say the probability is zero, but there are definitely more chances for a green Christmas for Montreal," Environment Canada meteorologist Alexandre Parent told the Montreal Gazette. Parent said after several days of colder than normal temperatures, it's expected to snow over the weekend and warm up for the next few days. By the time Christmas rolls around, however, temperatures are expected to hover a little above the freezing point. There is some precipitation in the forecast, but so far that will come in the form of rain, Parent said. "There's still some uncertainty around that system because it's still a few days away, but all the models point to a rain event on Christmas Eve."

