The snow of an overly long winter has finally left us, leaving behind six months' worth of dirt, grime and gravel to sweep up.
Montreal is embarking on its annual spring-cleaning blitz, dispatching a rolling army of 775 workers on a $50-million campaign to make the city look presentable for summer.
The city spread roughly 170,000 tonnes of salt and 30,000 tonnes of gravel on the roads and sidewalks this winter, ina season marked by numerous snowfalls and rapid thaws that encased the city in a persistent layer of ice.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-rain-and-ice )
Since most of the snowing and melting occurred during only a two-month period, the city did not use more gravel than normal, city spokesperson Philippe Sabourin said.
"We spread very little abrasives in November and December - remember, it was a green Christmas this year," he said during a tour of the city's street-cleaning operations in western Notre-Dame-de-Grâce Wednesday. "But we made up for it in January and February."
It will take four to six weeks to remove most of the winter detritus from the city's 6,000 kilometres of sidewalks and 4,000 kilometres of streets. Added to that are another 500 kilometres of alleyways, 800 kilometres of bike paths and 1,200 parks.
The battle is tackled in teams of three, with a large silver water tanker leading the charge, spraying down jets that loosen up the layers of filth and packed down leaves left over from last autumn, propelling refuse toward the sidewalk. It also helps keep down the dust.
The city aims to have most of the cleanup done by the end of May.
Next comes the sidewalk tractors, whose multiple nozzles spray garbage, dirt and gravel into the curb. At the rear of the operation is the sweeper-vacuum truck, whose rotating brushes loosen the refuse before Hoovering it into the machine's dumpster.
It is also the machine that suffers the most problems and breakdowns, mostly because of Montreal's lush tree canopy - branches that get sucked into the vacuum tubes often clog up the works, forcing the driver to go in for repairs.
The driver also spends a lot of time jumping out of the cab to pick up branches and other large pieces of garbage in his way, which on Wednesday included branches no thicker than an index finger, a plastic wagon wheel and a rubber floor mat.
Other impediments include parked cars, despite the no-parking signs, and piles of leaves or branches pushed into the street by residents. The trucks drive around the blockages, and will often come back another time to complete the job.
Crews have to wait till the snow's gone and temperatures rise, as below-freezing conditions interfere with the trucks' water systems and could also result in them covering streets in sheets of ice.
Moving steady, a shift of three can cover roughly 30 kilometres a day. Time is lost in returning to the local municipal yards to empty the sweeper truck's hopper four to five times a shift, and refilling water tanks from fire hydrants.
About one-third of the city's gravel, which is purchased at a cost of $30 a tonne from local suppliers, ends up in the city's sewage system, where it travels to Montreal's massive wastewater treatment system in the far east end of the city. It settles to the bottom of swimming-pool sized containment reservoirs, where it is collected, then dumped into landfills.
The other two-thirds is picked up during street cleaning operations and dumped into landfills as well. Since it is contaminated with salt residue, chemicals, contaminants like motor oil and numerous cigarette butts, the gravel cannot be reused, Sabourin said.
The city aims to have most of the cleanup done by the end of May.
For the last 10 years, the city has helped to organize communal spring cleanups, where citizens can come together to clean their local park or alleyway.
In 2018, nearly 25,000 Montrealers participated in more than 500 cleanups, or corvées, as they're known in French. Residents can organize or sign on to one through the city's website, (ville.montreal.qc.ca/corvees/( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/corvees/ )) and the city will supply bags, T-shirts, gloves and rakes.
The city will also help organize "plogging" events, a Swedish innovation in which participants combine jogging with trash collecting.
"The corvée events are good way for citizens to get together and help the environment, and it also fosters a sense of community spirit and of belonging," Sabourin said. "They've become popular traditions in a lot of places."
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
Related
Allison Hanes: Montreal needs some sprucing up( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-montreal-needs-some-sprucing-up )

