Tuesday, May 26, 2020: Here are some of the stories we've been following today.
Air conditioning a calculated gamble: Drouin
As temperatures continue to climb this week, Quebec's public health institute says it can't know for sure whether or not using air-conditioning units and fans could further spread the novel coronavirus in places housing COVID-19 patients. Read more here
Prepare for second wave, opposition tells Legault
The Legault government must prepare now for a possible second wave of COVID-19, the opposition parties at the legislature said Tuesday. On the same day Quebec's ombudsperson announced an independent investigation into the string of deaths in the province's CHSLDs, the three opposition parties held separate news conferences to say the government will not be able to argue it didn't see more cases of COVID-19 coming. Read more here
Déjà vu for Quebec's ombudsman
Quebec's ombudsman is launching an investigation into how COVID-19 has ravaged Quebec's nursing homes. As Marie Rinfret embarks on her probe, she may be experiencing a sense of déja vu, writes columnist Allison Hanes. Read more here
Military preparing report on Quebec's CHSLDs
The military is preparing a report about Quebec CHSLDs similar to the one that on Tuesday revealed inhumane conditions at Ontario long-term care homes, a spokesperson for the minister of public safety said. Read more here
Montreal to open splash pads in parks
The city of Montreal will begin opening splash pads in parks to help deal with the heat wave and give families a chance to cool off while they also cope with the COVID-19 pandemic, Montreal public health director Mylène Drouin announceed Tuesday. As Drouin spoke, the city issued a release stating "the boroughs will gradually open their water games starting (Tuesday)." Read more here
A 'heat event' on Wednesday
Forecasting that the region's first "heat event of the season" will take place Wednesday, Environment Canada on Tuesday issued a heat warning for the Montreal area. The warning, issued at 11:10 a.m. for Montreal, Laval and the Longueuil-Varennes area, predicts the humidex will surpass 40 C on Wednesday, as temperatures remain in the low 30s. Read more here
Strict rules for shopping malls
People who enjoy shopping in a mall might not be quite as keen once they peruse the long list of safety guidelines that Quebec will put in place when malls reopen. Read more here
Sludge dumped on farmland: report
A dominant player in the sump and sewer cleaning industry, has been excoriated in a report by Montreal's inspector general Brigitte Bishop for "fraudulent practices" - including dumping sludge on farmland instead of delivering it to a certified landfill in a bid to lower costs. Read more here
Cirque gets $200M loan from Quebec
The Quebec government is bailing out the Cirque du Soleil. Quebec Economy Minister Pierre Fitzgibbon announced Wednesday that Quebec will give the troubled Montreal-based circus a loan of US$200 million to keep it in business. Read more here
Summer soccer camps still on hold
While the Quebec government recently announced day camps can open on June 22, soccer camps are still waiting to hear from public health officials on exactly how they'll be allowed to proceed. Read more here
Day camps say they need help
Day camps have been given the green light to open this summer, but many popular Montreal camps say they need government funding to cover increased salary costs. Read more here
West Island day camps
What about day camps in the West Island? It's a mixed bag of decisions. Read more here
NHL unveils playoff plan
The National Hockey League will go straight into an expanded 24-team playoff format and all games will be held in two hub cities if action resumes this year amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Commissioner Gary Bettman said on Tuesday. Read more here
Habs in playoffs without Romanov
Russian defenceman Alexander Romanov won't be in the Canadiens' lineup when they face the Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round of the 2020 NHL playoffs this summer. Read more here
All our coronavirus-related news can be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette

