Hundreds of people are expected to converge on the U.S. border at Roxham Rd. Saturday in yet another showdown between far-right groups protesting what they call "illegal" immigration through the porous border and counter-protesters hoping to drown them out.
Storm Alliance, created by the splintering of the anti-immigrant Soldiers of Odin, is planning a "United for border protection" protest at 1 p.m. On their Facebook page, members were busily trying to arrange transport from various Quebec regions to Hemmingford.
But counter-protesters, mostly migrant justice groups from both sides of the border, hope to arrive in greater numbers starting at 11 a.m.
At a news conference Wednesday, they said their message was simple: Refugees are welcome, racists are not.
"We have to stop the rise of the far right in Quebec," said Aaron Lakoff, of Solidarity Across Borders. "(Asylum-seekers) have no choice but to cross at Roxham Rd. because of the shameful Safe Third Country Agreement. ... But contrary to what politicians and journalists are saying, there is no migrant crisis."
The Safe Third Country Agreement stipulates that refugee claimants must apply for asylum in the first safe country they can, which often means in the U.S., for which it is easier to obtain a visitor's visa. But it doesn't apply to unofficial border crossings, like Roxham Rd.
"But they are not safe in the U.S. because of (President Donald) Trump's xenophobic and racist policies," Lakoff said.
Hashim Shaban's experience is a case in point.
Upon entry into the U.S. from Mexico, Shaban, a stateless Palestinian from the Gaza Strip, was detained in Arizona while he awaited his refugee hearing, he said at the press conference Wednesday. His application for asylum was ultimately rejected, but he continued to be detained for 18 months because the U.S. couldn't find a country that would accept him.
When he was finally released, he travelled through Michigan to Windsor, Ont. and applied for refugee status at the official border crossing. But because of the Safe Third Country agreement, he was sent back to the U.S.
When Shaban crossed into Canada via Roxham Rd. several months later, he learned that because he had applied at an official border crossing, he cannot apply in Canada again.
Saturday's duelling protests will come on the heels of several other protests against the far right in Montreal: one, after a Nazi flag was waved( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/condo-owners-denounce-nazi-flag-waver-but-decline-to-identify-him ) from a condo building in Park-Extension; another, at the home of influential neo-Nazi recruiter( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/anti-racists-to-march-in-rosemont-la-petite-patrie-against-neo-nazi-on-saturday ) Zeiger, in Rosemont-Petite-Patrie.
Related
'We can't tolerate it.' Anti-racists protest against neo-Nazi in Rosemont( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/anti-racists-to-march-in-rosemont-la-petite-patrie-against-neo-nazi-on-saturday )
Alt-right in Montreal: Anti-fascists ramp up fight against neo-Nazis( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/alt-right-in-montreal-anti-fascists-ramp-up-fight-against-neo-nazis )
It will also be the third Storm Alliance protest at the border, since migrants began to cross at Roxham Rd. in greater numbers in 2017. Last September, an estimated 100 people marched with them, including local neo-Nazis Shawn Beauvais-Macdonald and Vincent Bélanger Mercure, both of whom had joined the alt-right protest last year in Charlottesville.
Along with other far-right groups like La Meute and Atalante, Storm Alliance wants the federal government to stop all immigration through Roxham Rd.
In their invitation to supporters to join the protest, Storm Alliance suggests that migrants put excessive strain on health and social services when Quebecers already have to "tighten their belts."
Olivier Prud'homme, a housing-rights activist in Montreal with POPIR, said that argument, often reused by Quebec politicians, is false - refugees and migrants have nothing to do with cuts to social services.
"Refugees aren't the cause of austerity," Prud'homme said at the news conference. "They are victims of it just like all other poor and working people in Quebec, regardless of where they're from."
From January 1 to April 30, 2018, the RCMP intercepted 7,612 people crossing the border irregularly across Canada, 7,307 of them in Quebec. That's about 60 per day.
But that number is likely to rise through the summer months, and as whole groups of people lose their immigration status in the U.S.
On May 4, the Trump administration announced that 57,000 Hondurans who have been in the U.S. for 20 years would soon lose their legal status.
Lakoff said the counter-protesters will offer a "festive" family-friendly atmosphere to show people crossing that they are welcome in Canada. But they will also use "direct action" to block Storm Alliance protesters from reaching the border, he said.
csolyom@postmedia.com( mailto:csolyom@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/csolyom( https://twitter.com/ )
CREDIT: Catherine Solyom, Montreal Gazette