The days shrink and night expands further into our waking hours. There are fewer chances to turn our faces toward the sun, and so we find other sources of warmth.
Many mainstream celebrations of fire and light are familiar. Kwanzaa. Hanukkah. Christmas. Others might be less so and offer an opportunity to learn about our neighbours. Pancha Ganapati is a Hindu holiday for Lord Ganesha, in which pine boughs and bamboo are decorated with blinking lights. The festival of Sadeh is "to honour fire and to defeat the forces of darkness, frost and cold" in mid-winter, according to the Iran Chamber Society( http://www.iranchamber.com/culture/articles/festival_of_sadeh.php ).
Gifts of candles were given during the unrestrained Roman celebration Saturnalia, and for Hogmanay the Scots traditionally welcomed the new year with fireworks and whiskey.
The winter solstice is Dec. 21. That day, the sun sets in Montreal at 4:13 p.m. Pagans of old and their modern-day counterparts lit bonfires and stayed awake through the longest night of the year to be the first to welcome back the sun. My family, the Juhls, may celebrate the solstice with the Feast of Juul, an ancient Scandinavian celebration during which a yule log is burned to honour Thor.
Whatever your celebration - ancient, secular or godly - the good thing about winter's darkness is you can take the children to a nighttime light show and barely miss bedtime. Here are some ways you can welcome back the sun this December.
POP! by Gentilhomme is a light show that includes animation on the side of UQAM's Pavillon Président-Kennedy.
The Marche de Noël aux flambeaux is a community-style parade, with music pouring from balconies along de la Roche St., courtesy of such choirs as Ensemble vocal Les Jongleurs, Les Nanas, Les Petites Voix du Plateau et Les Voix Ferrées. Exchange non-perishable food items (or $2) for a torch to use on the Dec. 7 candlelit walk, which begins at 7 p.m. at Compagnons Park and ends at La Fontaine Park. Clay and Friends will perform, and at 8 p.m. the skies will explode with fireworks. mont-royal.net.( https://www.mont-royal.net/evenements/2019-12-07/la-marche-de-noel-aux-flambeaux/ )
Luminothérapie at Place des Festivals is celebrating its 10th birthday with a "POP!" by introducing five Gumby-like creatures: Pop, Popup, Popli, Popette and Popotin. "Gather in front of them," organizers say, "and your collective energy will awaken the whole gang." The colourful creatures will project a story on the wall of UQAM's Pavillon Président-Kennedy. Nearby, holiday activities run throughout December at Place Émilie-Gamelin. The POP! installation continues until Jan. 26. quartierdesspectacles.com( https://www.quartierdesspectacles.com/fr/a-propos/les-productions-du-partenariat/oeuvre/85/POP/ ).
The Fontaine boréale at Complexe Desjardins is a light, sound and water show that runs several times a day until Dec. 31. It features four five-minute "magical moods" that can be viewed from any floor of the mall. The installation is part of Le Noël de Lëon, which also boasts an orchestra, miniature train, carousel ($2 per ride) and the "real" Santa Claus. Noël de Lëon runs until Dec. 24. Monday to Friday 10:30 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., Saturday and Sunday 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Closes at 3 p.m. on Dec. 24. 150 Ste-Catherine St. W. Showtimes for the fountain vary, and are listed at complexedesjardins.com( http://complexedesjardins.com/en/events/the-fontaine-boreale-show ).
The music of John Williams provides the soundtrack to fireworks in the Old Port of Montreal as part of Fire on Ice, presented on Saturdays from Dec. 14 to Jan. 4, 2020.
Aura Basilica is a series of multimedia installations projected onto the art and architecture of Notre-Dame Basilica. Visitors first tour the basilica, pausing to watch paintings come to life with eerie, quiet music in the background. For the second part of the show, guests sit in pews - there are no bad seats for this - and watch as the ceiling becomes the canvas for a gorgeous, one-of-a-kind orchestral light show. $15.50-$26.50, children 5 and under free. 110 Notre-Dame St. W. aurabasiliquemontreal.com( https://www.aurabasiliquemontreal.com/en/ ).
If the music of John Williams is your thing (and why wouldn't it be?), make some time for Fire on Ice. Fireworks will erupt over the outdoor skating rink at the Old Port Basin, their colours complimenting lights on the ice and over Terrasses Bonsecours. The sky is free, but day passes for the rink are $5.22-$7.83. Children 5 and under are free. Fireworks are Dec. 14, 21, 28 and Jan. 4, 8 p.m. oldportofmontreal.com( https://www.oldportofmontreal.com/event/fire-ice ).
Explore more at the Montreal Science Centre's new permanent exhibit, which has an entire section on light. Seven activity zones encourage exploration of geometry, air, motion, coding, matter, water and - you got it - light. There's also a gigantic bubble and an air labyrinth for mind-blowing scientific amusement. Weekdays 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., weekends 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. $9-$12.50. Children 2 and under free. Old Port, at the foot of St-Laurent Blvd. montrealsciencecentre.com( https://www.montrealsciencecentre.com/permanent-exhibition/explore ).
As you visit these attractions, find a way to detour to one or several of Cité mémoire's Grand tableau installations. Stories inspired by Montreal's history are projected onto walls throughout Old Montreal, the Old Port and the Queen Elizabeth Hotel, and each chapter has a tantalizing name, like Babylon of the North, The First Executioner and The Beaver Rebellion. Apps available from Apple or Google add a "soundtrack and historical context available in four languages." montrealenhistoires.com( http://www.montrealenhistoires.com/en/cite-memoire/ ).
Using more than 10 million lights, Illumi calls itself the largest multimedia sound and light show on the plant. Illumi is an offshoot of Cavalia, and runs until Jan. 5, 2020, in Laval.
Illumi, Féerie de lumières comes alive in the most unlikely place: just off Highway 15 in Laval. The 47-metre-high tree is the jewel in the crown, and visitors travel through eight gems of the world to get there, from the Infinite Poles of north and south to the savannahs of Africa. Find exotic animals, Hollywood stars, a fire pit and interactive games under what Illumi calls the world's largest tree of lights. Free shuttles are available from the Montmorency métro station or, if you must drive, two free mini-trains take visitors to the site from satellite parking lots ($10). $14.50-$18.50. Children 2 and under free. VIP tickets are available. Purchase is by time slot, Tuesday to Thursday 5 p.m. to 11 p.m., Friday to Sunday 4 p.m. to 11 p.m. 2805 Souvenir Blvd., Laval. illumi.com/en/( https://www.illumi.com/en/ ).
There are 300,000 fairy lights along the Route des Gerbes d'Angelica in Mirabel. In summer, this is a series of 14 themed gardens. As the days get shorter, the enchanted forest is illuminated and children get the run of the place. There's animation, plus a bistro and food truck for hungry imps. Take the clown car, because the cost is $30 per vehicle, no matter how many people are in it. Friday-Sunday, 3 p.m.-9 p.m. (closes at 8 p.m. on certain dates; check the website). 6015 Rang St-Vincent, Mirabel. gerbesdangelica.com( https://www.gerbesdangelica.com/ ).
A ridiculously simple winter craft for the Feast of Juul, decorated by Hayley, Trevor and Jillian Juhl.
The easiest winter craft in the world
You'll need: battery-operated tea lights, a Sharpie, glue, some construction paper, ribbon, or leftover craft supplies. Whatever you have lying around.
You're making a snowman. The flame of the light is their nose. Use a Sharpie to draw on eyes and a mouth, and make a hat with construction paper. You can add bows or use pompoms as earmuffs - let your imagination go wild.
You can prop up your little snowperson or glue a ribbon to their back to turn it into an ornament.
Don't forget to name them.
Light up the Instagram challenge
Each week, we invite our readers to show us the Montreal they know by participating in a #mtlfriday challenge on social media. This week, show us your ornaments. Maybe it's on a tree, maybe it lives on a shelf; all interpretations are valid.
To participate, all you have to do is take a picture related to this theme and post it on Facebook or Instagram with the hashtag #mtlfriday_ornaments.
You have until Wednesday at noon to enter the challenge. A winning entry will appear in next Saturday's newspaper.
hjuhl@postmedia.com( mailto:hjuhl@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/hjuhl( http://twitter.com/hjuhl )
Related
Yule logs: Here are the most offbeat ones we could find( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/television/yule-logs-here-are-the-most-offbeat-ones-we-could-find )
Montreal snow day: How to keep the kids from going (stir) crazy( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-day-in-montreal-how-to-keep-the-kids-from-going-stir-crazy )
Kids Crafts Survival Guide( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/kids-crafts-survival-guide )

