The dream of heated sidewalks for Ste-Catherine St. has been iced.
The administration of Mayor Valérie Plante has decided not to pursue the idea, first proposed by former mayor Denis Coderre, because it has been judged too expensive, potentially prone to costly breakdowns and could delay the first phase of the infrastructure overhaul that has just begun on Montreal's main commercial artery.
The cost estimate for heating the entire 3.3 kilometres of sidewalks to be dug up as part of the Ste-Catherine St. and Phillips Square makeover has ballooned to $120 million. For the first phase of the project alone, which involves rebuilding 700 metres of Ste-Catherine and its underground infrastructure from Mansfield to Bleury Sts., the estimated cost has risen to $32 million, when granite slabs are factored in. The initial estimate was closer to $20 million.
After weeks of speculation, sources confirmed the plan was dead Monday to the Montreal Gazette. In addition to the high cost, it was forecast the extra work could delay the street reconstruction by several months, causing price overruns for the city and businesses planning to do renovation work on their buildings. The main focus of the city administration and affected merchants is that the timeline be respected.
After the freezing rain that encased Montreal in a layer of ice last week, the idea of heating the sidewalks had become more appealing than ever. Proponents said it was a sure way to revitalize the city's central strip by enticing shoppers from the malls and convincing an older generation leery of broken hips to venture downtown.
But price surges and Montreal's failed trial run at heating a relatively small, isolated public square next to city hall gave the new administration cold feet over warm sidewalks.
Mayor Plante had expressed strong reservations about spending millions on a technology little used on this continent and potentially prone to costly breakdowns.
The concept was first floated by Coderre in 2015, when his administration unveiled plans to reconstruct( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-presents-plan-for-revamped-ste-catherine-st ) a 2.2-kilometre stretch of the city's iconic downtown thoroughfare and close to another kilometre of side streets, forced by the need to replace geriatric underground water mains and sewers.
Rare in North America, heated sidewalks have been used for decades in Scandinavian countries and places like Sapporo in Japan( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/josh-freed-dreaming-of-snow-free-sidewalks-and-a-bustling-downtown ), which receives more than 15 feet of snow a year. Last year, the city sent a delegation to study the technologies used in Helsinki, Finland, Norway's capital of Oslo and Reykjavik in Iceland. The first two use electricity to heat the sidewalks in portions of their commercial districts, while the Icelandic capital draws on its large stores of underground geothermal energy.
Officials also visited Holland, Mich.( http://www.mlive.com/business/west-michigan/index.ssf/2016/02/why_holland_spends_millions_to.html ), near Chicago, which uses free energy supplied by heated waste water from its municipal plant, running it through hoses placed under its sidewalks. The system has been in place for nearly three decades.
"Can we not have the means of our ambitions and do something spectacular for Ste-Catherine St? Think of the potential for economic development," said Opposition leader Lionel Perez.
Montreal engineers also considered using excess heat wasted by large buildings( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/are-heated-sidewalks-a-good-idea-for-montreal ) that heat with steam or hot water.
"We were in favour of that system, and perhaps using geothermal energy," said André Poulin, executive director of the merchants association Destination Centre-Ville. "But city officials said it would be too expensive."
The city decided it would go with running a mixture of water and glycol, a type of antifreeze, in polyethylene tubes resembling garden hoses beneath the sidewalk slabs, heated by electricity.
"The costs (of those types of systems) are very high, for installation and annual repairs and maintenance, and the risks are high that we will have to constantly dig up the sidewalk to repair breaks," Poulin said last week. "So we will not be overly disappointed if the idea does not go through."
Unlike the locales studied, Quebec suffers from vast temperature swings that "are the kiss of death" for those types of heated sidewalk systems, a source within the administration said. "Then we would be digging up the sidewalks all the time for repairs. It would be a nightmare."
The current administration was further disquieted by the city's failed attempts at Place Vauquelin, a pedestrian square next to city hall that was torn up and completely rebuilt last year at a cost of $14.7 million. An electric system installed to power the fountain and the snow-melting system failed two weeks after the square reopened in late June, putting an end to the waterworks and the heating. Then the city discovered in December that it needed a steam-pumping system on its heat exchanger. It's hoping the heating system needed to melt the snow will be ready in February.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( http://twitter.com/renebruemmer )
Related
Josh Freed: Six reasons Montreal should install heated sidewalks( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/josh-freed-six-reasons-montreal-should-install-heated-sidewalks )
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette

