See also: Snow doesn't stop tech workers Much of Ontario and Quebec was covered with a thick blanket of snow Tuesday, leading to problems for planes, trains and automobiles.
The severe snowstorm, which began in Windsor on Monday morning and gathered momentum as it moved eastward to Quebec, left a path of snow, freezing rain and ice pellets in its wake.
Most areas received at least 20 centimetres of snow, and as much as 66 centimetres is expected by the time the storm finishes Tuesday afternoon.
Homes and cars literally buried by snow in central Canada stood in stark contrast to the conditions in the Maritimes where temperatures hit as high as 13 C, said meteorologist Peter Lewis, at the Martimes Weather Centre, in Dartmouth, N.S.
The snow wreaked havoc at airports. Air Canada announced early Tuesday morning that it was cancelling or delaying more than half of its morning flights in Toronto, Ottawa and Montreal.
Tuesday afternoon, Air Canada said operations were starting to return to normal in Toronto's Pearson International Airport. By the end of the day, the airline said, customers will be put on alternate flights.
On Monday night, 70 per cent of the flights out of Pearson International Airport were cancelled.
But blowing snow and high winds have resulted in the cancellation or delay of Tuesday night flights in Ottawa and Montreal.
In Quebec, about 30 flights in and out of Montreal's Dorval Airport were cancelled as the storm began to hammer the southwestern region of the province. Thousands of schoolchildren got the day off school.
Flights are regularly cancelled in anticipation of bad weather to ensure passenger safety, said Laura Cooke, spokeswoman for Air Canada.
Schools were closed in towns and cities across Ontario and in parts of Quebec, as buses were unable to navigate treacherous roadways.
Children were seen playing in the snow throughout the day as hundreds of schools were closed in towns and cities across Ontario and in parts of Quebec. It was feared buses could not navigate treacherous roadways.
The first day of work was delayed for some of Canada's 48 rookie MPs who faced knee-high snowdrifts when they arrived at Parliament Hill for the first orientation session since the Nov. 27 election.
Those who managed to trudge through the snow arrived with their hair caked in the stuff.
"Some of them didn't come prepared," said Cheryl Gallant, MP for Renfrew-Nipissing.
While Ontario's major highways were mainly clear Tuesday morning, a number of tractor-trailers jack-knifed on entrance ramps, blocking access in spots. Police say a number of cars and trucks had also slid into guardrails and ditches.
Morning rush hour went smoothly in downtown Toronto despite the blowing snow and clogged sidestreets, said Sgt. Robb Knapper.
"People have either taken public transit or stayed home entirely. North of us, it's a mess."
In Toronto, Tuesday's snow cleanup is the first big test of the city's improved snow-clearing capacity, given a boost after several major storms in January, 1999, paralyzed Toronto and prompted Mayor Mel Lastman to call in the army.
The city has 1,177 pieces of snow-clearing equipment for the coming winter season, up 160 from last year. Toronto's snow-clearing budget for 2001 is projected to come in at $55-million, up $10-million from this year and up $21-million from 1999.
GO transit was reporting delays after some routes were closed, and as the trains dealt with commuter backlog.
At Toronto's Eaton Centre shopping mall patrons were scrambling for winter clothing such as boots and gloves.
"Some people weren't prepared for the weather. It's definitely busier than usual for this time of the week," said Matt Kaiser, assistant manager at the Stoneridge shoe store.
Students were using the school closures to squeeze in some holiday gift shopping.
"We really don't have time otherwise so this was great," said 15-year-old Emma Bongers, whose school was closed Tuesday. "I'm sure we're not the only ones," said Emma's friend Laura Vickery, also 15.
Midwestern Ontario, along the Lake Huron shore, was one of the hardest-hit areas, where heavy winds created metre-high snowdrifts. All schools were closed.
Sgt. David Rektor said roads were closed for most of the day, with roads littered with as many as 100 abandoned vehicles.
In Orillia, Ont., a report of 66 centimetres of snow could make the storm's record snowfall for the province, said Ron Miller, a weather expert from Environment Canada.
The storm began as a jet stream hit a cold front sitting over Colorado Monday. The jet stream created a low-pressure area, where Colorado's cold air clashed with warmer air sucked in from Texas and Oklahoma.
Fuelled by powerful winds, the whole weather system headed northeast toward the Great Lakes and grew in intensity.

