Editor's note: Today is the 20th anniversary of Maurice (Rocket) Richard's death on May 27, 2000, at age 74. To mark the occasion we are republishing the Canadiens icon's obituary, which was written by another hockey legend, Gazette sports columnist Red Fisher, who died on Jan. 19, 2018, at age 91.
Maurice (Rocket) Richard stood in this hockey cathedral, tears streaming down his face as the noise grew and grew, minute after minute for 10, 11 minutes, until there was no longer just noise in the Montreal Forum, but thunder engulfing it. Now and then, he would raise an arm - often both arms - pleading to the people, his people.
"Enough," he seemed to be saying to them on this Monday night of March 11, 1996, the night the building's lights would go dark forever. "Enough - I was only a hockey player."
Richard died yesterday in Hotel Dieu Hospital at age 78 after a battle of more than two years with abdominal cancer.
He was also a victim of Parkinson's disease.
Despite his protestations, Richard was much more than a hockey player.
He was the first National Hockey League player to score 50 goals in a 50-game season among his 544 in 978 regular-season games.
Richard was also the most intense athlete this game, this city, this province, this country ever has seen. He was everything that personified greatness. It was in this place - the Montreal Forum - where he was to become an icon, a legend.
He was, in every way, one of a kind.
As related by Chrys Goyens and Allan Turowetz in their book Lions In Winter, "Born Aug. 4, 1921, Maurice was the eldest son of Onesime and Alice Richard, who were part of the postwar exodus to the cities by young francophones all over Quebec.
"Onesime and Alice left their native Gaspe and settled in Montreal, where he went to work as a carpenter for Canadian Pacific Ltd.
"After a short time spent at the Plateau Mont Royal area, they moved to the isolated Nouveau Bordeaux district, in the north end of the city and across Rivieres des Prairies from what is now Laval.
"It was on that river, and in the schoolyards of the Bois de Boulogne and Laval that Maurice Richard developed his formidable talents."
The Rocket's best years already were behind him when I started covering the Canadiens at the start of the 1955-56 season. By then, after 13 NHL seasons, he had lost a step. He carried weight he found increasingly difficult to lose. But now and then in his last five seasons, he was once again the Rocket. On those nights, there was no finer sight anywhere this game of his life was played.
Richard's eye-snapping career numbers don't begin to describe what he meant to hockey in general and the Canadiens in particular. Winning at any cost was what he was all about. He was prepared to pay the price for every goal he scored, and no price was too high. He scored important goals, lifting spectators out of their seats everywhere in the six-team NHL, because he was as much the Rocket on the road as he was in Montreal. At any moment, anywhere, he could erupt with another big goal.
There was the night of March 23, 1944, when the Canadiens played host to the Toronto Maple Leafs in the second game of their best-of-seven Stanley Cup semifinal. The Richard who was to explode into full flower the following season - when he became the first player in NHL history to score 50 goals in 50 games - had shown what he was all about that year. He had scored 23 of his 32 regular-season goals in his last 22 games. (A dislocated shoulder sidelined Richard for four games of the Canadiens' stunning 38-5-7 season, including a 22-0-3 home record.)
He would be getting special attention from the Toronto Maple Leafs on this March night, particularly since the Leafs had upset the Canadiens 3-1 in Game 1 two nights earlier. The Leafs' best defensive forward, Bob Davidson, drew the assignment. His instructions: Go everywhere Richard goes. Don't let him out of your sight.
Richard couldn't shake loose from Davidson's clutch-and-grab tactics in the first period. Everywhere the Rocket went, Davidson followed, but Richard left the Leafs reeling with three goals in the second period. He added two in the third in what was to become the greatest individual performance in NHL playoff history. Maurice Richard 5, Toronto 1.
Until that night, no other NHL player had scored five goals in a playoff game. The Canadiens eliminated the Leafs with victories in the next three games and then swept the Chicago Blackhawks in four. He was to score 12 goals in nine playoff games that season, the Canadiens won their first Stanley Cup in 13 seasons, and the marvellous legend of Maurice Richard was born.
"He was a wartime hockey player," one-time Canadiens general manager Frank Selke once told a reporter.
"When the boys come back, they said, they'll look after Maurice. Nobody looked after Maurice. He looked after himself. When the boys come back, they said, they'll catch up with him. The only thing that caught up with Maurice is time."
"When he's worked up," said Selke, "his eyes gleam like headlights. Not a glow, but a piercing intensity. Goalies have said he's like a motor car coming on you at night. He is terrifying. He is the greatest hockey player that ever lived. I can contradict myself by saying that 10 or 15 do the mechanics of play better. But it's results that count. Others play well, build up, eventually get a goal. He is like a flash of lightning. It's a fine summer day, suddenly -"
"I first saw him in 1942," Ken Reardon, a former teammate who went on to become a Canadiens vice-president, told an interviewer. "I was playing for an army team. I see this guy skating at me with wild, bloody hair, the way he had it then, eyes just outside the nuthouse. 'I'll take this guy,' I said to myself. He went around me like a hoop around a barrel.
"'Who's that?' I asked after the game.
"'That's Maurice Richard,' the guy said. 'He's a pretty good hockey player.'
"'Yes,' I said, 'he is.' "
Maurice Richard on the night he received ovation on March 11, 1996, when the Forum closed.
The Richard legend wasn't supposed to develop as quickly as it did. The fact is, some hockey people felt it would never happen. His bones were as brittle as peppermint sticks, some people said. Injury-prone, they muttered. The problems started when he was invited to the Canadiens Seniors' training camp in 1940. He made the team, scored two goals in the first regular-season game, then caught his skate in a rut in the third period. His ankle snapped, and Richard missed the rest of the season.
The following year, he played well for the first 20 games, suffered a broken wrist in his 21st, missed the rest of the regular season, but returned to score six goals in four playoff games. The 1942-43 season was his first with the NHL Canadiens: this time he fractured his right ankle. Three major injuries in three years. Maybe, just maybe, his critics were right. Maybe he was indeed too brittle to play in the NHL.
The Stanley Cup year erased those fears, followed by his stunning 50-in-50 season. Three days after Christmas, Richard scored five goals and assisted on three others in a 9-1 victory over the Detroit Red Wings. Remarkably, he scored 43 goals in his first 38 games, and in Toronto the following week he tied Joe Malone's record of 44 goals in a 22-game season.
A week later, the same teams were at the Forum, and nobody needed a road map to understand that the Maple Leafs, as a group, were prepared to do anything to prevent Richard from scoring his 45th. With nine games remaining in the season, Richard, as long as he remained healthy, was certain to eclipse Malone's record. The Leafs had no problem with that - as long as the goal wasn't scored against them.
It's why Richard once again had Toronto players following his every move. Davidson was on him. Nick Metz stayed close to him. Often, the team of Davidson and Metz would be all over him. Midway through the third period, with Richard still looking for his 45th, he shook off two Toronto defenders and swept in on Frank McCool. The sellout crowd of 14,000 held its breath, poised to erupt, but the Toronto goaltender stopped him. Then, with roughly four minutes remaining in the game, linemate Toe Blake caught Richard with a pass and, in one motion, he one-timed it at McCool. Goal!
Reports of the record-setting goal mention that the wild celebrations that followed held up the game for 15 minutes. Richard could do that to his people - over and over again.
Eight games remained in the season, so now the question was: Could he reach the magic 50? If so, when? If not, why not?
Richard was only one goal shy of the 50-goal mark - once thought to be unreachable - when the Canadiens played their final home game, No. 49 in the 50-game schedule. By now, his pursuit of the magic 50th had everyone following his every move on every shift.
Wouldn't you know it: late in the game against Chicago, he was awarded a penalty shot. Can you imagine the noise in the Forum when he moved in alone for the shot that would be heard around the world? Imagine also, then, the crowd's terrible anguish, the buzz of dismay, when a Chicago goaltender with marginal talent, Doug Stevenson, stopped the mighty Rocket. (Stevenson, a career minor leaguer, played only a total of eight NHL games with the Rangers and Chicago.)
The Canadiens travelled to Boston for the season's final regular-season game. The Bruins were leading the Canadiens 2-1 with fewer than three minutes remaining in the game. Dutch Hiller had scored the only Canadiens goal 8:24 into the second period, but now all of the attention was on Richard.
Time was running out, and so was the Rocket's attempt to score his 50th. Even the Boston crowd was on its feet when Richard came on the ice for what could have been his last shift of the regular season, his last chance to score the goal. Seconds later, centreman Elmer Lach collided with Boston goaltender Harvey Bennett, leaving Richard with what amounted to an empty net for the milestone goal.
Less than a minute later, Richard earned the assist on Toe Blake's winning goal. Eighteen seconds beyond that, Lach added a fourth.
Richard's 50-in-50 season was remarkable in many ways. He failed to score in only 16 games. At no time did he go more than two games without scoring.
His best streak was during a nine-game stretch between Jan. 20 and Feb. 10 when he scored 14 goals. His worst came in the last 13 games of the season, when he scored only seven. He didn't stop with his 50-goal regular season, adding six while the Canadiens were being upset in six games by the Maple Leafs in the Stanley Cup semifinal.
Fifty-six goals in 56 games - his place in Canadiens history and in the hearts and minds of his people was now assured.
It has been suggested, and there's a valid argument for it, that Richard's passion for winning was the start of the French-English "thing" in Quebec.
If he had been "only a hockey player," his suspension for the final week of the 1954-55 regular season and the playoffs after getting involved in a savage stick-swinging duel with Boston defenceman Hal Laycoe would have been little more than a hiccup in NHL history and, by extension, Quebec's.
Instead, it fanned the flames of a cultural revolution that went far, far beyond Richard the player.
He meant everything to his people, on and off the ice. When he and the Canadiens won, they won. When the Canadiens lost, they lost. When the perception was that he was treated harshly by constituted authority, it was his people who felt the pain and the anger.
Has it really been more than 45 years since that St. Patrick's Day morning in 1955? There was a hint of snow in the air, but nobody in Montreal was thinking about the weather on this day. The Detroit Red Wings were in the city, but the Canadiens would be playing without Richard. His people were in a foul mood.
There was trouble ahead.
You could sense it, breathe in the sour smell of it.
"Go to the Forum," I was told by my sports editor at the Montreal Star. "Just hang around. See what's happening. See if Richard is there. Talk to Howe. Find out what he thinks about this business."
"This business" was a city poised to explode because hockey's most electrifying player had been suspended for the last three games of the regular season and the entire playoffs.
Thousands of people jammed the sidewalks as Maurice Richard's funeral cortage passed on Ste-Catherine St. in downtown Montreal.
Richard had been in trouble with NHL president Clarence Campbell that season, once for referring to the president as a "dictator" in an article ghostwritten for him in a French-language newspaper, another time for butt-ending Toronto rookie Bob Bailey in the face.
Worse, Richard repeatedly tried to renew his attack on Bailey and refused to leave the ice when ordered by the referee. Now there had been the ugly, stick-swinging incident in Boston with Laycoe. There was also the matter of Richard striking linesman Cliff Thompson in his attempt to get at Laycoe.
The Canadiens and Bruins were fierce and unforgiving rivals in the six-team league. Bench-clearings were the rule, rather than the exception, because when teams met 14 times during the regular season grudges carried on from one game to another.
Richard had been the best - and fiercest - of hockey's superstars for a decade. Every opponent wanted a piece of him and he of them from the moment he became the first player to score 50 in a 50-game season. Ten years later, the regular-season schedule had increased to 70 games, and while Richard no longer was the goal-scorer he had been, his dedication to winning remained. The fire in him still burned.
The incident that led to Richard's suspension had happened the previous Sunday. Laycoe, who was generally regarded as a mild-mannered player, had struck Richard on the side of the head with his stick. Richard responded by high-sticking Laycoe on the shoulder and face. When Richard's stick was taken from him, he grabbed another and struck Laycoe twice on the back. Linesman Thompson, who was trying to restrain Richard, was struck in the face.
Three days later and the day before this Canadiens-Red Wings game in Montreal, NHL president Campbell brought down the decision that shook the hockey establishment in general and Canadiens fans in particular
Richard, poised to win his first scoring title, was suspended for the remaining three games of the regular season. He was also suspended for the playoffs. Gone was his opportunity to win his first scoring title. Also gone were the Canadiens' playoffs hopes.
Campbell, who had been urged not to attend the game by Montreal Mayor Jean Drapeau, had arrived at his Forum seat several rows above ice level roughly halfway through the first period. By that time, the Red Wings led 2-0.
The moment Campbell was spotted in his seat, there were angry cries and threats from groups of fans. Eggs and tomatoes were thrown at the president.
At period's end, a fan walked up several steps toward Campbell, offering to shake hands. When Campbell reached for his hand, he was slapped in the face. Seconds later, a decision was made to forfeit the game to the visitors.
Even today, people remain bitter over the suspension that quickly developed into hockey's worst case of violence off the ice. In a matter of minutes, there was an outpouring of looting and burning. Cars were overturned. A mob of thousands shattered windows along Ste. Catherine St. Thirty-seven adults and four juveniles were arrested.
The wonder of it, though, was that nobody was killed on that black night, which was to become known as the Richard Riot. The next day, a visibly shaken Richard, who had attended the game, sat behind a forest of microphones, pleading with the people, his people, to exercise calm.
What made Richard the icon he was to become was the way he scored his goals. From the blue line in, there was nobody as fierce or intense.
It was the passion within him each time he swooped in on an opposing goaltender, often with another player, or players, clinging to his back. It was in his arms and in the barrel of his chest. It was in his eyes.
Big goals were all he was about. Playoff goals - 82 in 133 post-season games, a record that was to stand for more than two decades. Remarkably, after all these years, his six overtime goals remain a playoff record. His seven three-or-more-goal games in the post-season are behind only Wayne Gretzky's NHL-high 10. And even Gretzky was unable to match the five goals Richard scored in his 5-1 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Big goals: none bigger than the one he scored against the Boston Bruins in the seventh game of their 1952 semifinal.
Early in the second period of this pivotal game at the Forum, Richard was knocked out in a collision with Bruins forward Leo Labine. In the clinic, six stitches were needed to close a gash over his eye. The medical staff felt he was through for the night, but after spending the rest of the period and most of the third in the clinic, there he was sitting alongside linemate Lach on the bench. The score was 1-1. Four minutes remained in regulation time when Richard returned to the ice with Lach and Bert Olmstead.
Defenceman Butch Bouchard started the play that would become, to some people, the Rocket's greatest goal. Richard took the pass deep in the Canadiens zone, skated the length of the ice, wheeled around defenceman Bill Quackenbush, swept in on goaltender Sugar Jim Henry - and goal!
This hockey player, this icon, this remarkable athlete, had added yet another chapter to his legendary career. He had battled through a concussion to win yet another series for the Canadiens.
The next day, newspapers across the country carried a memorable photograph of Richard, blood pouring from his left eye, and Henry - his right eye blackened after being struck with a puck in Game 6 of the series - shaking hands.
The Canadiens were to become hockey's greatest dynasty - five consecutive Stanley Cups - during the first five seasons I covered the team with Richard as its captain.
By that time, the Richard flame didn't burn as brightly as it had during previous years. Injuries and the calendar had cut into his brilliance, although not into his dedication to winning.
The Canadiens were a close-knit family during those years. They would travel and, at times, party in a pack - but too often without the Rocket, their captain, among them. In those days, the team would play a Sunday night game in Detroit, then board a midnight train to Toronto where a Wednesday night game awaited them. In Toronto, at least a dozen, perhaps 15 players would get together during the day, but almost always without Richard. Nobody asked why. He was Maurice Richard; he danced to his own tune.
On Tuesday, it was back to the rink for a long practice because there was a game to be played the next night. The players had had their fun on Monday, Tuesday was a workday and Richard was there, practicing hard because there was a game to be won Wednesday.
Even then, there was a special aura about him. There was only one Rocket.
It's why in early July 1975, almost 15 years after Richard's retirement, Rick Salutin sat with me outside Banff, Alta., talking about the Canadiens, in general, and the franchise's brightest star in particular. Salutin was there because he had been commissioned to write a play about Les Canadiens.
"Tell me," he said, "about the Canadiens. What do they mean to the people of Quebec?"
I told Salutin that if you fight but don't win the real battle against those who are perceived to be the real rulers, you try to win elsewhere in a forum where you are successful. In other words, on the ice with the Canadiens.
Related
Private funeral service held for former Canadien Henri Richard
Henri Richard, 1936-2020: Images from a storied career
Montreal Canadiens hockey legend Jean Béliveau dies
Gallery: Jean Béliveau state funeral
Montreal loses a hockey legend as Red Fisher dies at age 91
From the archives: Red Fisher's only appearance on the HI/O Show discussing Dickie Moore's death
Later, in an introduction to his play, which was first performed at the Centaur Theatre in February 1977, he wrote that it was very much the same answer he got at a bar in Quebec City.
"I watched a hockey game on television and marvelled at the frenzied involvement of the fans," he wrote. "I put to my drinking partner this question: 'How come?'
"She said: 'The Canadiens - they're us. Every winter they go south and in the they come home conquerors.' "
If the Canadiens were the conquerors, Richard was their commander-in-chief. He brought to them a tradition of winning that reached remarkable heights.
He wasn't the Richard of old when the Canadiens embarked on the marvellous adventure that would produce five consecutive Stanley Cups from 1956 through 1960, but they were the only five years I would see Richard play. His game had lost some of its shine. What remained, however, was the fire in his eyes, and the intensity. He was still the flag-bearer for a culture, for his people.
Anything less than winning was unacceptable and remained that way until he scored what turned out to be the final goal of his career in the 1960 Stanley Cup final against the Maple Leafs. It was his 34th in the finals.
It was also the only goal he scored in the playoffs that year, one in which the Canadiens allowed only 11 goals in series sweeps over Chicago and Toronto. As it developed, it was to be his last.
He reported to training camp several months later, scored four goals in a morning practice and later in the day, was asked to report to general manager Frank Selke.
I happened to be sitting outside Selke's second-floor office at the Forum when a grim-faced Richard strode in. Thirty minutes later, he stormed out.
"They want me to retire," he snapped.
Selke had pointed out to the 39-year-old Richard that in his last three seasons, injuries had sidelined him for 89 of 210 games. It was time, time for the torch to be passed. That night, a special 30-minute CBC live telecast delivered the news to homes across the country.
Richard's 544 regular-season goals are the most in Canadiens history. He was also this historic franchise's most revered player, but was he the best?
Others could skate faster than Richard. Some could shoot harder a pass better. Nobody, however, approached his intensity. Nobody wanted to win more. Not Gordie Howe, not Gretzky, not Mario Lemieux. Not anybody before his time, or since.
Richard brought the entire package to the arena. He inflamed his people on and off the ice. He stirred their souls like no one else before him or since.
He was, after all, the Rocket.

