Busy Tuesday? Here are a few stories you might have overlooked.
Ariel Jeffrey Kouakou's parents wrote an open letter to the person they believe took their boy near a north-end Montreal park in March.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/no-room-for-hatred-ariel-kouakous-family-forgives-possible-abductor ) Still convinced Ariel was abducted and is alive somewhere, the family describes in the letter how they're ready to forgive the person if they come forward and would even welcome them into their lives.
"We're trying to look at this in a positive way," said the missing boy's father, Kouadio Frédéric Kouakou, on Tuesday. "For someone to abduct a child, it's because they're missing something, either affection or a child's presence in their life."
Montreal police suspect the 10-year-old drowned in Rivière-des-Prairies after entering a park that borders the water, but Kouakou has repeatedly rejected the idea. He believes someone has his child. The letter describes the different emotions the family has been living through for the last four months. Adding to the anguish, Kouakou writes, is the "pain of the unknown and questions without answers."
This July was the hottest the island of Montreal has experienced in nearly 100 years.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hot-damn-july-was-one-of-hottest-on-record-in-montreal ) The month's average temperature of 24.2 C fell just half a degree shy of the all-time high of 24.7 C, recorded 97 years ago in 1921.
The 2018 average is also three degrees above the mean July temperature of 21.2 C. From day to day, a three-degree increase might not seem like a lot, but over a month, it makes a difference, said Environment Canada meteorologist Simon Legault. He explained that mean monthly temperatures tend to vary by one degree year to year, so a difference of three degrees is "way (above) normal for a month-long period."
Dominique Paquin, a climate simulation and analysis specialist with research consortium Ouranos, said it's too early to definitively attribute the waves of extreme heat that spread across the northern hemisphere in July to climate change, "but we know that with climate change, the number of days with extreme heat will increase."
Related
Poll: Did it feel like the hottest July in nearly 100 years?( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/poll-did-it-feel-like-the-hottest-july-in-nearly-100-years )
The city of Montreal has proposed three alternative sites for the new McCord museum( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-offers-three-new-potential-locations-for-mccord-museum ), after announcing in May that the planned site for the museum's new $150-million home would instead be turned into a park.
Each site fulfils the museum's criteria, the city said in a statement released Tuesday, including that the building be downtown, near the Quartier des Spectacles and easily accessible by public transit. President and CEO of the museum, Suzanne Sauvage, said the McCord is considering two of the three choices, but studies to find out which site is best could cost as much as $250,000 each.
"It's a nice effort that the city made, but our favourite site was still the Eugène-Lapierre site," Sauvage said, referring to a location that the Coderre administration had initially promised next to the Place des Festivals.
CREDIT: Katya Teague, Montreal Gazette

