After only nine days of operations, the Société québécoise du cannabis( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/marijuana ) announced on Friday that a lack of supply has forced it to reduce the operating hours of its 12 sales outlets to four days a week.
Beginning Monday and until further notice, the dozen SQDC stores in Quebec will be closed Monday to Wednesday and open during scheduled operating hours from Thursday to Sunday.
The decision to reduce the operating schedule came after supply problems - present from the day the stores opened( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/day-1-selfie-factor-likely-boosted-demand-for-cannabis-professor-says ) on Oct. 17 - grew increasingly worse throughout the week.
As of Friday morning, more than 50 of the 68 products listed for sale on the SQDC's website were out of stock. The agency hopes the new schedule will allow outlets to "stabilize" their inventories.
The SQDC said its online store( https://www.sqdc.ca/en-CA/ ) will remain open, with an average of about 30 products available. Delivery will take about two to five days.
The agency said there are cannabis supply problems across the country. It said it has signed supply agreements of three years or longer with producers and placed orders to meet the expected demand for cannabis in the first trimester of its operations. The SQDC said cannabis producers have a "colossal" job ahead of them to fill the orders it has placed.
"We're dealing with massive pent-up demand," said Allan Rewak, the executive director of the Cannabis Council of Canada, an industry association. "We've had prohibition for 90 years and when you open the tap, so to speak, there's going to be an initial flood of enthusiasm that in excess of normal enthusiasm."
Intermittent supply issues could continue for the first year, but they are a symptom of the industry's success, he said.
"It was impossible to accurately predict with 100 per cent certainty what the demand would be, but it has to be understood, too, that it's not like we've sold out of legal cannabis, we might sell out in a store, we might sell out in a certain strain, but it's not like licensed producers do not have, depending on the producer, more cannabis in their inventory," Rewak said.
Limiting store hours and supply problems have raised the ire of one of the unions that has applied to represent the SQDC workers. The FTQ-affiliated Syndicat canadien de la fonction publique (SCFP) has accused the SQDC of "mismanagement" and said it fears for the security of jobs, leaving the new workers in a precarious situation.
However in a statement issued Friday the SQDC said that no layoffs would occur because of the schedule change and that employees would also be working on days when the stores were closed in order to process product deliveries.
But the agency also warned that while the curtailed store schedules would allow outlets to re-stock their shelves, it was always possible that not every product would be immediately re-supplied.
Related
Montreal's rules for smoking recreational cannabis same as tobacco: Plante( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreals-rules-for-pot-will-be-same-as-smoking-cigarettes-plante )
Cannabis shortage could be downfall of retail network, SQDC worries( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/cannabis-shortage-could-be-downfall-of-retail-network-sqdc-worries )
CAQ wants to hike legal age for cannabis to 21 by March, minister says( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/caq-wants-to-hike-legal-age-for-cannabis-to-21-by-march-minister-says )
No weed, and now no wine: SAQ employees launch surprise strike Friday afternoon( https://montrealgazette.com/news/no-weed-and-now-no-wine-saq-employees-launch-surprise-strike-friday-afternoon )
Presse Canadienne and Jacob Serebrin of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report.

