Promoted to brigadier at 27, he led armoured units through fierce fighting all the way from Normandy until the fall of Germany. He later became vice-chief of defence staff
? Standing stiffly at attention in front of a very senior British officer, Robert Moncel of the Canadian army blinked in disbelief when the lieutenant-general told him tersely, "you may send in your brigadier now."
Keeping his temper in check, he replied, "Sir, I am the brigadier!" The corps commander had obviously neglected to check the badges of rank sewn on the shoulder straps of Gen. Moncel's battledress jacket. He looked, he would have seen the three stars and crown of a brigadier-general.
Promoted on Aug. 17, 1944, Gen. Moncel was the youngest general officer in the Canadian army when, at 27, he took over command of the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade (4 CAB). The general had obviously pegged him as a lieutenant, possibly a captain.
To counter his youthful appearance, Gen. Moncel had decided to grow a mustache to make him look more mature. He was tired of people calling him "babyface on stilts!" Gen. Moncel, a tall, slender, soft-spoken man known for his sense of responsibility, enjoyed meteoric promotion during the Second World War. Talented officers who prove themselves in combat and at headquarters are considered valuable assets, and Gen. Moncel earned the admiration of his peers and the approval of his superiors. He commanded 4 CAB from the breakout at Normandy, where he was mentioned in dispatches, all the way through France, Belgium, the Netherlands and into Germany until final victory on May 8, 1945.
Maj.-Gen. Harry Foster thought a lot of Gen. Moncel. "Guy Simonds said that if I got in trouble I could always rely on Moncel," he wrote in his diary. "I came away with the distinct impression that if young Moncel had been 10 years older Guy would have given him the division and left me with the brigade."
That was high praise indeed. Known for his exemplary skills as a staff officer, Gen. Moncel was able to make the transition from fighting a paper war to commanding soldiers in battle. Not every officer can. "Moncel proved to be an excellent brigadier. The officer he replaced was suffering from stress and fatigue and had been drinking heavily, behaviour that had an adverse effect on the formation. Moncel's tenure of command would prove a great contrast. He provided competent leadership and was well respected," said retired major Michael McNorgan, co-author of
Mr. Moncel was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for the leadership he displayed at the end of February, 1945, when 2 Canadian Corps mounted Operation Blockbuster. Commanding Tiger Group, Gen. Moncel and his force fought a tenacious enemy during the Battle of the Hochwald Forest.
He "stationed himself well forward with the leading battle groups and on several occasions, when the impetus of the attack was in danger of being lost by stubborn enemy resistance, personally directed consolidation of objectives and the further forward movement of his armoured and infantry elements," the DSO citation read. "All this was done under extremely heavy hostile fire, and the gallant bearing of this officer, and the complete disregard for his own personal safety, were an inspiration to all troops under his command."
Bob Moncel was born into the 12th generation of an old French-Canadian family. His father manufactured electric fuse boxes and wanted his son to take over the company, but young Robert decided business was not for him. While studying at Bishop's College School in Lennoxville, Que., he found a spiritual home in its cadet corps. Founded in 1861, the corps was the oldest in Canada. "It came naturally and easily to me, something I could do fairly well."
He attended Montreal's McGill University and served as an officer with the Victoria Rifles of Canada, which was founded in 1862. Back then, an officers mess in the militia was frequently an exclusive club limited to the social elite. When you applied, they wanted to know who your father was.
Canada declared war on Germany on Sept. 10, 1939, and soon after that Gen. Moncel went overseas with the regular army's Royal Canadian Regiment. After the Germans unleashed their blitzkrieg in May, 1940, he and the RCR were ordered to France the following month in a hopeless effort to reinforce the British Expeditionary Force. Amid complete chaos, Gen. Moncel, who commanded a Bren gun carrier platoon, was soon ordered to turn tail and make for the French coast.
"In the chaos of the evacuation much valuable equipment was abandoned or destroyed to keep it from enemy hands. Although told to destroy his vehicles Lieutenant Moncel instead used his initiative and cool judgment to arrange the evacuation of the carriers and got them back to Britain," said Mr. McNorgan.
That caught his superiors' attention and Gen. Moncel was soon promoted captain. In 1941, he finished first on a staff course. The commandant, Guy Simonds, marked him as a bright officer and he was on his way. In January, 1943, he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and given command of the 18th Armoured Car Regiment (12th Manitoba Dragoons).
Eight months later, Gen. Moncel was posted to the headquarters of 2 Canadian Corps, where he organized its general staff branch. He was made an officer of the Order of the British Empire for his "painstaking work and efficiency" there. France made him a Chevalier de la Legion d'honneur and awarded him the Croix de Guerre avec Palme.
After the war, Gen. Moncel elected to stay in the army. He filled a variety of high-level staff jobs, including quartermaster-general, deputy chief of the general staff and commander of Eastern Command, responsible for the Atlantic provinces.
By the early 1960s, things were about to change for Gen. Moncel and his beloved army. The Minister of National Defence, Paul Hellyer, was determined to unify the three fighting services, come hell or high water. In 1964, Gen. Moncel gave Mr. Hellyer the benefit of the doubt and became the first comptroller-general of the integrated Canadian Forces Headquarters. A lieutenant-general at only 47, he had almost eight more years to serve until compulsory retirement at 55. There was still time to go even higher. In 1965, he was appointed vice-chief of defence staff.
In his 1990 autobiography, , Mr. Hellyer recounted how he had briefly considered appointing Mr. Moncel the second chief of defence staff (CDS). "A handsome, debonair and bilingual officer, Bob had an excellent war record and was a good administrator. Nevertheless, he was something of an enigma. He wore a lace handkerchief up his sleeve -- which must have been unique in the army -- and his logic was a bit inconsistent. He spent hours trying to persuade me we should only have one regiment of Canadian infantry, with numbered battalions. That would have meant abolishing [some]famous Canadian regiments."
Mr. Hellyer soon decided that offering the top job to Gen. Moncel would be a mistake. "Whereas, I had managed to outlast [Air Chief Marshal Frank Miller] the reverse would be true with a younger, fresher antagonist [Mr. Moncel]who could scuttle the plan by simply stonewalling until I was gone."
In 1966, amid tremendous controversy over unification that split the country, Gen. Moncel decided the minister was moving too fast and resigned. In his book, Mr. Hellyer implied Gen. Moncel was unhappy with the appointment of Lieut.-Gen. Jean Allard as CDS. "The three remaining top men had decided, overnight, to resign en masse. It appeared to me like a calculated attempt to embarrass me in the eyes of my government colleagues and the public."
The following year, in February, 1967, Gen. Moncel, who usually shunned the spotlight, appeared in front of a Parliamentary committee to express his doubts about unification. "To me, [unification]appeared to be moving on an uncharted course at a very, very high speed towards a very, very dim destination, and I did not think I could produce the staff work necessary at that speed to keep the thing on the rails."
"He clobbered us," Mr. Hellyer wrote. "He had been a very effective witness. He said he wasn't opposed to unification, per se, if there were a change in Canadian commitments. However, with our existing commitments, it would affect our close working relationships with the U.K. and U.S. This was a bit of stuff and nonsense, but it sounded plausible to anyone who wanted to believe it."
It didn't take long for Gen. Moncel to get another job. Appointed co-ordinator for visits of foreign heads of state during Canada's centennial celebrations in 1967, he supervised 54 state visits to Ottawa and Montreal, including the Queen, the Shah of Iran and the Emperor of Ethiopia. After it was over, he was made an officer of the Order of Canada.
Gen. Moncel retired to Nova Scotia after Centennial year. He kept busy with painting, gardening, boating, woodworking and community projects. He also obtained his private pilot's license for airplanes and helicopters, and learned the guitar, organ and flute.
ROBERT MONCEL
Robert Guillaume Napoleon Moncel was born on Apr. 9, 1917, in Montreal. He died of natural causes in Halifax on Dec. 10, 2007. He was 90. He is survived by his son-in-law, George Constantis, grandchildren Aliki and Constantine. He was predeceased by his wife, Nancy, and by
daughter Renee.
On Dec. 17, 2007, a military funeral was held at Canadian Forces Base Halifax. The mourners included Gen. Rick Hillier, the chief of defence staff.

