Here's what happened while there was a slight warming( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-61RB ).
The city of Montreal said it had hauled away about one-quarter of the snow that fell on the weekend as of late Tuesday afternoon( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-removal-some-montreal-boroughs-are-faster-than-others ). he snow-removal operation began Monday at 7 p.m. and is expected to take about one week. Some boroughs are more advanced than others. Verdun leads the pack, having removed 59 per cent of the snow on its territory. Tied for last place are Ahuntsic-Cartierville and Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, both of which stood at 18 per cent. About 23 centimetres of snow fell on Sunday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-is-being-clobbered-by-an-unusual-uncomfortable-blizzard ). Montreal says approximately 2,000 vehicles are being used in the snow-removal operation.
Indoor temperatures at the Montreal General Hospital over the weekend and into Monday during the city's cold snap( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/temperatures-drop-inside-montreal-general-hospital-during-cold-snap ). The problems, which were felt in the emergency room, came after burst pipes caused heating problems. Staff distributed electric blankets to patients and installed portable heaters in the ER as the indoor temperature dropped to as low as 15 degrees Celsius. Two patients were moved to another room because of flooding caused by the burst pipes. The lack of heating affected Pavilions A, B and C. The heating was restored by mid-afternoon Monday to nearly all areas except the 5th and 6th floors of Pavilion B, where air remained trapped in the pipes of the water-based radiators. Gilda Salomone, a spokesperson for the McGill University Health Centre, said heating on those floors should be restored by Wednesday.
An arrest warrant has been issued for a northern Illinois man who police say allowed an 11-year-old relative to drive herself to school in a stolen rental car while he rode along. The Lake County News-Sun reports( https://www.chicagotribune.com/suburbs/lake-county-news-sun/news/ct-lns-child-driving-warrant-st-0122-story.html ) that employees at a Round Lake Park elementary school saw the girl pull up to the school's drop-off point on Jan. 9. She and a 9-year-old girl who was in the back seat exited the car. Police say 31-year-old Khafilu Oshodi of Round Lake then moved into the driver's seat and drove away. He's wanted on two counts of child endangerment and driving with a suspended license. Police Chief George Filenko says the drop-off area is very busy and the incident could've "resulted in any number of tragic scenarios" if the child lost control.
With files from the Associated Press.