There's nothing like a major catastrophe to burnish the credibility of a strong leader.
Former mayor Colette Roy Laroche's reputation as Lac-Mégantic's beloved "Granite Lady" was forged in her graceful handling of the rail disaster that claimed 47 lives and put a close-knit small town at the centre of the international spotlight.
New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's empathetic response to the massacre at a mosque in Christchurch in 2019, along with tough measures that twice crushed COVID-19, helped assure her decisive re-election this month.
Premier John Horgan's pandemic election gamble in British Columbia helped the New Democratic Party secure the largest victory in its history over the weekend - as well as demonstrate that in times of crisis voters tend to embrace familiar incumbents.
But a year out from the next municipal election, COVID-19 is not having the same effect on Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante's fortunes.
According to new polling data for Radio-Canada, support for Plante has eroded. While 41 per cent of respondents told Ad Hoc Research they would definitely or likely still give her their vote in 2021, six in 10 Montrealers said they probably or most certainly would not. Plante unseated former mayor Denis Coderre with a 51-per-cent share of the ballots cast in 2017.
Even among those who played a role in Plante's win, 47 per cent said they would be less inclined to support her a second time around. Plante's strongest backers are, not surprisingly, younger. Just over half of 18- to 34-year-old Montrealers polled said they were planning to endorse her next year. But 63 per cent of those surveyed between the ages of 35 and 54, and 66 per cent of respondents older than 55 indicated they intend to vote against Plante.
There's only so much you can read into a poll conducted a full year out from the next election. That's a lifetime in politics and the world could be turned upside down yet again by the time Montrealers are ready to mark their ballots. Besides, 41-per-cent support is not negligible.
However, the absence of any real opponent is worth noting here. At the very least, it's a warning shot across the bow by an increasingly disgruntled and grumpy electorate that they would opt for a question mark in this time of uncertainty over the mayor who has led the city through a tough time.
Even Premier François Legault, who is taking heat for reconfining most of the province again as a second wave of COVID-19 sweeps Quebec, has solid ratings. Sure, they've taken a tumble from lofty heights as his detractors have grown louder. But 61 per cent of Quebecers surveyed by CROP this month gave his handling of the crisis positive reviews and Legault outpaces all the opposition leaders by far.
This most recent poll showing waning patience for Plante echoes others from late summer, including one that put her behind her old adversary Coderre And he hasn't even declared his candidacy.
It begs the question: why have so many Montrealers grown disenchanted with their mayor at a time most citizens tend to stick with known quantities?
To be fair, many of the worst problems plaguing the city at the moment - from second-wave pandemic restrictions closing restaurants and bars to office workers abandoning the beleaguered downtown since spring - are beyond Plante's control. And many of the solutions are outside of her authority.
Still, the public has not found Plante's pandemic response soothing, despite her generally sunny, upbeat demeanour.
In the midst of a crisis, where people tend to resist change and crave stability, Plante has rapidly altered the Montreal landscape, adding temporary health corridors for pedestrians on some commercial strips and installing permanent cycling infrastructure on others. Some of these measures might have been in her platform all along and others may be emergency steps in keeping with Projet Montreal's vision, but many Montrealers have been spooked by them. Plante may have misread the public's appetite for new approaches and projects at this time.
Pushback from businesses on some streets slated for transformation - including St-Denis St. in the Plateau-Mont-Royal and Bellechasse St. in Rosemont-La-Petite-Patrie - have created a perception the city is kicking entrepreneurs while they are down. And this is in spite of tax relief, reduced-price terrasse permits over the summer and the announcement of free street parking during the critical holiday shopping season to bolster local merchants.
Far from running to their mayor with open arms as the pandemic wears on, some Montrealers have soured on Plante.
The question is, can she yet find a way to make lemonade amid all this bitterness?
ahanes@postmedia.com
Related
Allison Hanes: Valérie Plante's detractors are getting louder
Allison Hanes: Montrealers aren't ready to throw lifeline to downtown

