I saw my first real sign of spring last week, a Montreal urban version of the first robin. It was an outdoor terrasse on Peel St. - and my heart throbbed.
Since then flocks of terrasses have arrived, a heart-warming, seat-warming sign this endless winter has finally ended.
I got a similar warm shiver when city workers tore down the hockey rinks and put up park benches, picnic tables and Bixi stations, even if many still don't have bikes.
These are sure-fire signs of Montreal spring and we need them, after a five-month winter that began with a Nov. 16 blizzard( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/first-serious-snowfall-of-the-season-slows-montreal-traffic-bus-service ) and ended with another mid-April( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hydro-outages-leave-more-than-240000-in-the-dark-in-laval-laurentians ).
OK, it's probably pouring as you read this, since weather sites have all posted a scary "RAINFALL ALERT!" (Beware of falling rain!)
But our town is finally reawakening in all its glory, grit and grime. So let's celebrate the seven signs of spring:
Sign 1: Two billion tons of black ice has finally melted, revealing 200,000 tons of gravel underneath, flung down by city workers all winter. It covers our city like a layer of moon dust, fused together with five months of cigarette butts, lotto tickets and candy wrappers, 500,000 plastic bags, and 650 trillion dead leaves.
Also, a winter's worth of dog poop left by owners who should be impounded instead of their dogs.
Sign 2: The Tam Tam drummers were out at Mount Royal last Sunday after a deafening five-month silence. I've never been happier to hear them, though there were only 100 people there, drumming away in parkas and mitts.
The crowds will get bigger every week while clothing gets ever more skimpy. If we didn't have winters, it would eventually be a nudist gathering.
Sign 3: Construction's in full spring swing, with so many road-blocked streets you'd think we're trying to catch spies.
Every second street is a forest of orange detour signs. A friend sent a photo of four detour signs at a Verdun intersection, all for highway 15 - all pointing different directions.
Even my GPS is confused lately, sending me down streets saying Rue Barré, then changing routes again and again, until my screen freezes on the word "re-rerouting".
I suspect my Google Maps app is desperately consulting Waze, while my Waze consults Google. Who can fault them? In Montreal all roads now lead to ruin.
Spring is also pothole season and this year boasts a record "bump"-er crop. We've all become "road scholars", studying each pothole carefully to avoid ones that can cost you a wheel, or worse.
Last week the city reported it's already filled 55,000 potholes( https://journalmetro.com/actualites/2302316/55-000-nids-de-poule-colmates-depuis-le-debut-de-lannee/ ). Only 99,999,945,000 to go.
Sign 4: Strikers and protesters are back on the streets, whether they're Bill 21 demonstrators, taxi drivers or angry unions.
There's a reason the student protests were dubbed Maple Spring. Our protests are the year's first outdoor gathering, in a Festival of Discontent.
Sign 5: There are downsides to spring too. Since April 1, the street-sweeping machines are back. So is the post-spring rite of setting your alarm to move your car to the other side of the street, along with all your neighbours.
Then we all circle the block playing "musical cars" where winners get spots and losers traditional $52 tickets. Ooops, make that $78 since the province just shockingly boosted the price( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/cost-of-parking-tickets-going-up ).
It's enough to make me drive right to Laval for a free spot, then métro home.
Sign 6: The best spring gift is the extra light as the sun now sets at 7:45 p.m., instead of four hours after I wake up. It's been brighter ever since we returned to daylight saving - but switching our clocks may soon be a spring thing of the past.
European Union countries will all stop clock-switching in 2021, though each country will vote whether to stay on permanent "summer" or "winter" time.
It can't be long before that spreads here. I pray Montrealers eventually vote for daylight-saving - not daylight-craving time.
Sign 7: I just did my annual spring tour of The Main's shops to see who'd survived, or died. I was pleased to find more survivors than usual.
My favourite ramen resto had closed, but all the hip new clothing, tattoo and coffee shops that opened in recent years are still there after this long winter. Bravo!
Several new places are opening and to my amazement, three had signs posted saying "Help Wanted."
Montreal signs like that were once rarer than construction cranes, which were rarer than whooping cranes. But now they're just another mark of spring.
Several Main merchants have put out their "illegal" plastic chairs for aging customers to sit. Soon city inspectors will be ticketing them, while merchants take in the chairs on days inspectors regularly come by - in the most idiotic rite of spring.
I say three cheers for the chairs!
Meanwhile, ignore the RAINFALL ALERT!, the dirt, potholes, detours and parking tickets and focus on the bright side.
Soon you'll be wearing sandals, lounging on terrasses and festival-hopping. It won't be long before you're complaining again - about the heat.
joshfreed49@gmail.com( mailto:joshfreed49@gmail.com )

