It seems winter is testing us.
After a respite from winter on Thursday and Friday, the national forecaster is warning weather conditions will get worse in the Montreal area over the next few days.
Environment Canada issued a winter storm warning Friday, saying "hazardous winter conditions" are expected as the temperatures dip and the rain transitions to frozen precipitation.
The rain will change to freezing rain and ice pellets, making a slippery base for 15 to 25 centimetres of snow expected to fall overnight Friday into Saturday.
"Snow will intensify Saturday and will be accompanied by brisk northwest winds giving local blowing snow," the statement said, adding that highways, roads, walkways and parking lots may become icy and difficult to navigate due to the ice and snow expected.
Urgences-santé is urging people in the Montreal area to stay at home.
"With the fluctuation in temperature, and the winter storm alert that was issued by Environment Canada, Urgences-santé is asking people in Laval and Montreal to not leave their homes, if possible," the agency said Friday. "For those who must go outside, we ask you to be very careful, because the meteorological conditions that have been forecast usually lead to numerous accidents and calls to 911."
While the temperature in Montreal was 10 Celsius at 3 p.m., temperatures will take a steep downturn later Friday afternoon. It's expected to be minus-10 by Saturday at 7 a.m., and the temperatures will continue to plummet throughout the day on Saturday, with temperatures reaching the minus-20s throughout the day. The high forecast for Sunday is minus-17, and Monday's high is forecast at minus-16. It will warm up slightly for Tuesday and Wednesday, with temperatures around minus-10.
Meanwhile, Montreal streets were 87 per cent cleared of last week's snowstorm as of 3 p.m. The Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough still lagged, with a 67-per-cent completion rate. Thursday's champion( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-is-at-the-bottom-of-the-snow-clearing-heap-st-leonard-on-top ) Saint-Léonard had completely cleared its streets and several other boroughs were either finished or nearly finished by 3 p.m. Friday was an off day for workers, so there were fewer plows and snow-removal trucks on the streets.
Related
N.D.G. is at the bottom of the snow-clearing heap, St-Léonard on top( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-is-at-the-bottom-of-the-snow-clearing-heap-st-leonard-on-top )
November 2017: Prepare for the Montreal winter of your youth - that's La Nina( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/prepare-for-the-montreal-winter-of-your-youth-thats-la-nina )
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

