Irene downgraded to post-tropical storm but high winds and heavy rains still pack a punch
Downgraded from a hurricane, Irene still managed to wreak havoc on travellers' plans as it entered Canada on Sunday, with dozens of U.S.-bound flights cancelled and passengers travelling to and from Eastern Canada being warned they could suffer the same fate.
Now considered a post-tropical storm, Irene still brought hurricane-like conditions, with the worst winds in Nova Scotia and heaviest rains in Quebec and western New Brunswick.
As the remnants of the hurricane barrelled down on New Brunswick, Gordon Nason was crossing his fingers.
The pensioner is one of the few people left in Second Falls, a rural area west of Saint John, that has flooded already in the last year. Many people have moved away and condemned houses sit empty, their swing-sets unused and trees dropping fruit on the ground.
But Mr. Nason, who moved in after the floods to a house that had collected a foot of water, was cautiously optimistic Sunday afternoon. Manipulation of the dam upstream had brought down the river level, he said, reducing the chances it would again burst its banks.
"I think we're going to be okay, I'm not sure but I'm hoping so," he said. "I just watch the water. If it's rising I'll move out, I'll have to, until it goes down again."
Others were taking aggressive measures to protect against Irene. A home farther downstream had heavy equipment and a boat at the ready.
But some in the province were blasé about the approaching storm.
In the mid-evening a steady stream of cars were turning up at a Saint John beach, which the city had warned could experience a storm surge. Hundreds of people gathered under leaden skies at Saints Rest to watch the waves roll in. A windsurfer and a pair of kite-boarders took advantage of the gusts.
Although weather had been grim for much of the day, a number of people pointed to the example of past hurricanes that had received great attention and then fizzled before arriving.
Officials across the Maritimes have been pleading with residents to take this seriously.
"Let's all give this storm the respect it deserves," Ross Landry, Nova Scotia's Minister of Justice, said in a statement. "Irene will bring heavy rain and high winds and the hazards those conditions can create. Please err on the side of caution."
Western Nova Scotia and areas around the Bay of Fundy are under a tropical storm warning and will see wind gusts of up to 120 kilometres an hour. Grand Manan, an island just south of the New Brunswick mainland in the Bay of Fundy, and Yarmouth, on Nova Scotia's southwestern tip, are expected to receive the worst battering.
Porter Airlines, which flies out of Toronto Island's Billy Bishop airport, cancelled all Boston and Newark flights on Sunday. The company has asked passengers flying to Quebec City, Montreal, Halifax, Moncton and St. John's to check the status of their flights before heading to the airport, as they too might be cancelled.
More than 40 flights scheduled to arrive at Toronto's Pearson International Airport on Sunday night were cancelled by early evening, and dozens more were delayed. The majority of cancelled flights were from the eastern United States, though one flight from Montreal was cancelled, likely due to the number of planes stuck at U.S. airports. Many flights from Atlantic Canada were pre-emptively listed as delayed, signalling that the region is preparing for harsh conditions.
More than 248,000 homes were without power in Quebec Sunday night as Hurricane Irene steamed northward. Hydro-Quebec said most of the outages were in the Montreal region, the Eastern Townships and the Quebec City area as the outer fringes of the storm brought heavy rain and gusts to the province.
Eastern Quebec - including Quebec City, Sherbrooke, and the Eastern Townships - and western New Brunswick are expected to receive 50-100 millimetres of rain over the course of the day.
Parts of southwestern New Brunswick and southern Quebec have already received in well excess of 50 millimetres of rain. Fredericton, N.B., received 83 millimetres of rainfall by midnight and Sherbrooke, Que., had been drenched by about 105 millimetres.
The storm's effects in the region are expected to last through Monday, with some wind and rain lingering into Tuesday. By Monday evening, Irene's centre is expected to be over Quebec's Gaspé Peninsula.
Its reach is so wide that cities as far west as Ottawa could see heavy rains by Monday. Bursts of wind and rain are expected to hit Labrador, but not nearly with the same intensity as the Maritimes and southern Quebec.
Chris Fogarty, program supervisor with the Canadian Hurricane Centre in Halifax, said that after Irene's rainfall passes through the Maritimes, the wind will remain - meaning some areas could see a sunny day with wind gusts up to 100 km/h.
Wind warnings have been issued for much of the region. Environment Canada said Windy Hill near Greenwood, N.S., reported a wind gust of 93 km/h early Monday and gusts of 90 to 110 km/h are forecast for early Monday over exposed areas.
On Saturday, Irene was a Category 1 hurricane, the lowest designation on the scale, but changed in shape as it moved north, Mr. Fogarty said, becoming a post-tropical storm by Sunday afternoon.A post-tropical storm is greater in area but weaker in intensity than a hurricane, he said. Rather than high-intensity winds near the centre of the storm, it is spread out among the storm system. The nature of the storm is such that rain will be heavier on the west side of Irene's track of movement, while wind will be heavier in the east."The highest winds near the centre of the storm are not nearly as intense as they are down in the tropics," Mr. Fogarty said.When viewed by satellite, Mr. Fogarty said, a post-tropical storm looks more like a wintertime blizzard, more comma-like in shape than a concentrated hurricane.Despite the classification, Environment Canada - which oversees the Canadian Hurricane Centre - has issued a tropical-storm warning for the Bay of Fundy area, "just to make people a little bit extra aware of the potential for higher winds," Mr. Fogarty said.The Canadian Hurricane Centre monitors coastal weather even before hurricane season, predicting how major storms will change as they approach Canada.As Irene enters Canada on Sunday, Environment Canada asks residents to monitor the weather as frequently as they can. With a report from The Canadian Press

