The first of two storms expected to sweep across much of Quebec between Tuesday and Thursday made itself felt early Tuesday.
Expected to drop anywhere between 10 to 15 centimetres of snow over the next two days, the storm system hit the Abitibi-Témiscamingue and Outaouais regions on Monday, moved in to the Montreal area Monday night and barrelled toward the eastern half of the province on Tuesday morning.
Environment Canada warned that certain areas could expect a tough morning commute( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/what-to-expect-when-youre-expecting-winter-snow-blowing-snow-rain ) and that prediction was realized on and off the island of Montreal. While the snow had stopped by 7:30 a.m., blowing snow and road conditions ranging from wet pavement to snow or slush-covered slowed traffic on Montreal Island highways and was blamed for several multi-vehicle accidents on the north and the South Shores. The eastbound lanes of Highway 10 in Chambly were temporarily closed after two tractor trailers skidded off the road.
Less than a day after Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante questioned the efficiency of her city's snow removal operations( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/icy-conditions-persist-and-valerie-plante-wants-answers-again ), city crews were out in force at 1 a.m. Tuesday, concentrating on access to schools, hospitals, métro stations and bus stops as well as main thoroughfares.
Approximately 1,000 vehicles have been deployed by the city and are expected to be in operation for four to eight hours after the snowfall ends.
The city of Montreal says it expects to gradually begin snow removal operations as of 7 a.m. Wednesday.
Transport Quebec reported that the situation on many highways in the storm's path was complicated by blowing snow, which reduces visibility and creates snow dunes on exposed stretches of road.
Highways affected by the windswept conditions include Highways 30 and 104 in the Montérégie region as well as Highways 50 and 148 in the Outaouais and Highway 116 in the Eastern Townships.
The forecast for Tuesday calls for a high of 3 degrees Celsius and snow mixed with freezing drizzle changing to rain or drizzle near noon. A local accumulation of about 2 centimetres of snow is expected. Tonight, periods of rain or drizzle will change to snow as the temperature is expected to hover around zero.
This story will be updated.

