Here's what happened while you were having some much deserved rest.
Hurricane Willa, the weather system that devastated parts of Mexico,( https://montrealgazette.com/pmn/news-pmn/the-latest-willa-becomes-category-5-storm-off-mexico/wcm/55648d39-1ece-4bc8-91c8-ad596389f3ba ) has been downgraded to a tropical storm - but it is set to leave its mark on Montreal this weekend.
The storm that originated in the Pacific Ocean is continuing its slow journey toward the Atlantic - via Florida, New York and Montreal - in the form of strong wind, rain storms and possibly the season's first nor'easter. Or, as MétéoMédia prefers: a "cocktail météo."
Environment Canada issued a special weather statement Friday morning warning that the system from the U.S. is bringing the gift of snow, ice pellets and freezing rain to southern Quebec.
Things are expected to start geting dicey on Saturday night, when we could see some flurries. That'll continue into Sunday morning with an unpredictable mix of flurries and showers. Then it's rain as far as Environment Canada can see.
President Donald Trump claims he's being blamed for the mail bombs( https://nationalpost.com/pmn/news-pmn/the-latest-trump-claims-hes-being-blamed-for-mail-bombs ) addressed to some of his most prominent critics.
Trump says in a tweet sent before dawn Friday, "Funny how lowly rated CNN, and others, can criticize me at will, even blaming me for the current spate of Bombs and ridiculously comparing this to September 11th and the Oklahoma City bombing, yet when I criticize them they go wild and scream, 'it's just not Presidential!"'
Pipe bombs were sent to Trump critics including Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton and to ex-CIA director John Brennan at CNN but didn't explode.
Trump tweeted Thursday much of the anger in society is caused by the "Mainstream Media."
Brennan replied Trump should stop blaming others and should "Look in the mirror." Brennan advises Trump to "try to act Presidential."
Meanwhile, investigators have been searching coast-to-coast for the culprit and motives behind the bizarre mail-bomb plot aimed at critics of the president, analyzing the innards of the crude devices to reveal whether they were intended to detonate or simply sow fear two weeks before Election Day.
Three more devices were linked to the plot Thursday - two addressed to former Vice-President Joe Biden and one to actor Robert De Niro - bringing the total to 10 in an outbreak of politically loaded menace with little if any precedent.
Law enforcement officials told The Associated Press that the devices, containing timers and batteries, were not rigged like booby-trapped package bombs that would explode upon opening. A search of a postal database suggested at least some may have been mailed from Florida.
Funny how lowly rated CNN, and others, can criticize me at will, even blaming me for the current spate of Bombs and ridiculously comparing this to September 11th and the Oklahoma City bombing, yet when I criticize them they go wild and scream, "it's just not Presidential!"
- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 26, 2018( https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1055719340832686080?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
The Canadiens looked like they ran out of gas( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/in-the-habs-room-we-blew-it-its-our-own-fault-we-lost-julien-says ) in their 4-3 loss to the Buffalo Sabres on Thursday night, but that's not the way coach Claude Julien saw it.
"They outcompeted us," Julien said. "I'm not going to say our guys didn't work, but they outcompeted us. They won a lot of battles along the walls, way more than usual. In our own end, we had to do a better job of killing plays and getting the puck out. We didn't do a good job of that. They were on pucks quicker than we were on a lot of occasions. But even so, for a road game we were still in the game with a chance to win or at least come out with a point and we blew it. It's our own fault."
The Canadiens got two goals from Max Domi and a single from Joel Armia, while Jason Pominville scored twice for the Sabres and Sam Reinhart also scored. Armia was in the penalty box for tripping when Okposo scored the winner.
The Canadiens will be back in action Saturday night in Boston against the Bruins (7 p.m., SN1, CITY, TVA Sports).

