Montrealers are suffering from a troubling new condition called Post-Traumatic Cone Disorder (PTCD) - and you might be a victim.
I was alerted to the problem by Montreal psychiatrist Norman Hoffman, who wrote to say: "There has been a large increase in anxiety and fear of construction cones, a condition naturally called Orange Coneaphobia."
Dr. Hoffman's letter is written with his tongue firmly planted in his cheek. He goes on to warn about other cone syndromes, including Obsessive Cone Disorder (OCD) and Pothole Depression Depression (PDD).
Beneath Hoffman's humour is a ring of truth. After years of ceaseless construction, what psychological effect have our cones had? Ask yourself: Could YOU be suffering from one of the following conditions?
Post-traumatic Cone Disorder: This affects people experiencing nightmares, or recurring flashbacks of stressful moments in conestruction. In their memories, they're surrounded by cones on all sides, yet no matter where they turn there's No Exit.
Some get anxious simply seeing the colour orange, setting off distressing "cone flashbacks." Triggers might include passing an orange construction sign, piles of oranges outside fruit shops, or the Orange Julep.
Other stressful objects to avoid: life vests, cantaloupes, Cheetos, Kraft Dinner, goldfish (the fish), goldfish (the cracker), the Golden Gate Bridge, campfires, sunsets - and Florida.
Construction Confusion Syndrome (CCS): This strikes when a street you took a half-hour ago is suddenly blocked on the way back by 5,000 orange cones that materialized from nowhere. Google Maps says the street is open - but cones and traffic are lined up for kilometres.
Traumatic reactions might include sweating, weeping, cursing or freezing at the wheel in panic, unsure which way to go. This can provoke a fight-or-flight response, causing you to make a sudden U-turn across two lanes of traffic trying to head back where you came - as everyone ho-ooonks.
Welcome to "Game of Cones!"
Coney Island Rage Episodes (CIRE): Many motorists become highly irritable in construction, honking at cyclists, seniors and mothers with strollers. Some scream at the cones themselves, shouting hurtful things like "You @#$%$#$ cones - rot in the rain!"
Please! It is not acceptable to insult, or run over an innocent cone. However, when parking your car, if a cone has been left in an unjustified place, blocking a badly needed parking spot, it's okay to, er ... move it farther down the block.
To eliminate evidence, stuff the cone into your trunk and dispose of it in a distant Dumpster, as advised in Abbie Hoffman's classic book: "Steal this Cone."
Britain is installing "intelligent cones" that scream when moved or hit by vehicles - then spring back into place. But as cones become increasingly smart, perhaps we can just talk to them - especially those that prevent any parking on often deserted downtown streets.
YOU: Please, cone! I just need to park for a few minutes. I'll be long gone before morning when workers arrive. Promise!
CONE: Okay, okay, I'll give you a break this time, but don't make me regret it. I've just taken your facial recognition photo.
Abusive Cone Behaviour (ACB): You know the scenario. You're driving down a Montreal street on a pitch black night when you suddenly see a large, dark cone looming before you like an iceberg threatening a ship. It's supposed to warn there's a pothole there, but the cone is a bigger menace, so you swerve madly to avoid it, using years of Montreal cone-avoidance expertise.
This kind of behaviour cannot be tolerated. We need a Montreal Cone Hot Line where motorists can report reckless cone conduct.
Road Depression Depression: Excessive construction has left many feeling helpless, but health professionals suggest treatments. For instance:
1. When driving, even at night, always wear sunglasses with a dark blue filter that screens out disturbing orange colours. If
coneaphobia strikes, take several deep breaths to enter a more calm, meditative state.
Relax. Relaa-a-xxx. Do not close your eyes while driving.
2. As in Alcoholics Anonymous, it's helpful to have a designated friend to talk you down during coneaphobic episodes. They can offer you guidance, by dictating GPS instructions over your speakerphone: "Okay - put your car in reverse! Now back up down the street right over that line of cones. Take a U-turn into the little alley, cut through the park in front of you and ... you're home free!"
This is considered acceptable road conduct in Montreal, but you risk a $1,000 ticket for driving while talking on the phone.
3. Take a relaxing construction vacation in a cone-free zone. How about Giethoorn Village in Steenwijkerland, Holland, where there are no cones whatsoever because there are no roads?
4. Avoid all possible coneaphobia triggers, especially meeting people named Cohen.
Warning: This St-Jean weekend both the new and old Champlain Bridges into Montreal are closed, with a cornucopia of cones cutting the city in two.
Should you feel overwhelmed, repeat the following wellness mantra: "Every day, I feel better and better because the roads are getting better and better.
"There will no more cones by 2040."
Bonne Fête, everyone.
joshfreed49@gmail.com( mailto:joshfreed49@gmail.com )

