Since city crews installed bike paths on either side of Terrebonne St. a month ago, Annie O. and her two children have been riding their bikes eagerly every day along the east-west artery.
"It's much safer," said the 44-year-old Notre-Dame-de-Grâce resident, as she stopped her bike Saturday to wait for the red light on Terrebonne at Draper Ave. "I feel more confident riding with my 11-year-old and 8-year-old."
Two minutes later, Priyanka Vemuri came to a stop on her bike at the same corner. "I'm not a car driver, so I think it's a very good idea," she said.
Eliminating residential parking on either side of Terrebonne St. is the latest effort by Projet Montréal to transform the metropolis into a bike-friendly oasis. Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough mayor Sue Montgomery, who is no longer a member of Projet Montréal, supports the initiative.
The first phase involved painting street lines and installing green plastic posts along Terrebonne from Girouard Ave. in the east to Madison Ave. in the west. The borough intends to extend the bike paths to the end of Terrebonne at Belmore Ave., Montgomery's spokesperson, Annalisa Harris, told the Montreal Gazette.
Politicians, activists and school board officials have had their say about the project. People have been debating on social media.
But what about cyclists, motorists and residents who live on the leafy street? In some cases, a cyclist is also a motorist who lives on Terrebonne. One of them is a 74-year-old retired actor and devoted enthusiast of the handcrafted, high-end Cannondale bike.
"I love it," the Terrebonne resident said of the bike paths. "What I've noticed is that they slow down the traffic, which is a good thing."
However, he acknowledged some residents are "pissed off."
"For people who depend on the parking, it's not a good thing," he admitted. "In my case, that's not a problem because I have a driveway."
The longtime N.D.G. resident declined to provide his name to a reporter. Other cyclists were also reluctant to give their names.
Across the street, 54-year-old Colin Parsons was sitting on the steps of a duplex overseeing his garage sale of old albums and CDs. Business was slow on a lazy summer afternoon.
Parsons, who moved to the upper level of the duplex recently, said he's not against bike paths, but he accused the borough administration of imposing the project on the neighbourhood without adequate consultation.
"I don't like having to park around the corner," he said. "I'm all for the environment, but a bike path is like using a squirt gun in a forest fire. The real problem are the pipelines."
Parsons warned when the junior campus of Willingdon Elementary School reopens on Aug. 31, finding parking will prove impossible, and motorists will be jockeying for spots on narrow side streets.
The bike paths will stay on Terrebonne until October, when work crews will remove the green posts for winter. For Parsons, October couldn't come soon enough.
aderfel@postmedia.com
twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel
Related
Montreal's summer plans: An extra 327 km of bike paths, pedestrian lanes
As bicycle demand soars amid pandemic, theft frustrates Montreal cyclists

