A man has died after a road accident during Wednesday's snow storm.
The man in his 70s succumbed to injuries incurred during a multi-vehicle collision that left more than 50 vehicles stranded on Highway 20 West near Mont-Saint-Hilaire.
The pileup sent 15 other people to the hospital with minor injuries. The highway was closed for several hours, Wednesday afternoon. "We have to clear the highway, then tow all the vehicles," said the SQ's Montérégie spokesperson Joyce Kemp, adding that minibuses had been dispatched to the scene to take people who are not injured away from the area.
The storm, expected to leave 10 centimetres of snow, also caused traffic slowdowns in the city and at the airport on Wednesday evening.
Highway 30 closed in both directions between St-Constant and Candiac because of another accident involving several vehicles and at least two jackknifed trucks.
As well, Highway 10 west was closed due to a multi-car collision near Chemin du Ruisseau-Barré, in Marieville; and due to another multi-car collision near Magog.
Aside from those major accidents, a lot of cars have gone off the road, Kemp said, encouraging drivers to slow down, keep a safe distance and prepare for a variety of challenging conditions.
Several flights in and out of Trudeau Airport were delayed or cancelled Wednesday. To keep up with the latest flight schedules, visit admtl.com/en/flights( http://www.admtl.com/en/flights ).
The Société de transport de Montréal had advised people to allow for extra time for their commute, and warned that providing service to wheelchair users at accessible bus stops might be difficult because of the storm.
The forecast for Montreal calls for a steady snowfall - a rate of about one centimetre per hour - through to 10 p.m.
Wind gusts of up to 26 km/h further complicated travel for rush-hour commuters.
Wednesday's snowfall occurs as the city of Montreal reports 63 per cent of its streets have been cleared since the last substantial snowfall, on Sunday. You can check on your borough at the city's snow-clearing tracker: ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement ).
Related
Nearly full snow dump sites could hamper clearing operations( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/nearly-full-snow-dump-sites-could-hamper-clearing-operations )
CREDIT: T'Cha Dunlevy, Montreal Gazette

