Staff and supporters of the Coop la Maison Verte, an eco-friendly fixture for the past two decades on Sherbrooke St. W., are hoping N.D.G. community members will make a last-ditch effort to keep the store open.
Co-ordinator Sheena Swirlz told the Montreal Gazette the co-operative store is on the verge of closing unless members can come up with funding ideas, recruit some skilled directors for the board and even volunteer for certain chores. A special meeting will be held on Jan. 16 to explore options. In the meantime, hours have been reduced most days and the store will be closed on Mondays.
"Despite our best efforts, the past has created a situation where we are now almost out of resources to the point where we don't know if we can continue much longer," Swirlz said. "So we are hosting this special general assembly to ask the community for help."
The co-op has only three directors left on its nine-member board of directors, and Swirlz said the attrition is partly because "it is very stressful to try to figure out how to save the co-op."
Customer and new volunteer Valerie Fauteux gets the rundown on helping out at the store by co-ordinator Sheena Swirlz, left, in Montreal on Tuesday, Jan. 7, 2020.
The co-operative was founded in 2000, two years after the ice storm. According to the co-op's website, that event highlighted how many people in the relatively wealthy community of N.D.G. were living in isolation. Founders wanted to create a community gathering space, a member-owned co-operative that would offer environmental products, services and ecological living advice to the community. A "solidarity co-operative," the coop is owned and controlled by its members. Members pay an annual fee for voting rights, and get a discount of five to 10 per cent on products.
The co-op thrived for several years, attracting more than 10,000 members at one point, its shelves teaming with ecologically-themed, locally produced goods, including artwork, clothing and food items. But Swirlz said debt began to mount in recent years, partly because of trouble with a contractor. A crowdfunding campaign( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/n-d-g-co-op-launches-crowdfunding-campaign-to-preserve-building ) launched in 2017 failed to raise enough money to turn the tide.
The co-op was forced to sell the building that houses it last spring because of its debt load, and has been staggering under stiff competition from a chain health-food store, the Branche d'Olivier, right across the street.
The primary goal of next week's meeting will be to find at least three more volunteer board members, Swirlz said.
"Unless we get more board members, we cannot continue to operate," she said.
Related
Give eco gifts on the holidays, but make sure they're fun( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/green-life-column-shut-up-and-eat-your-dinner )
Green gift ideas in and around Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/green-life-column-a-present-for-the-earth-too )
Look for organic cotton or opt for used clothing to reduce ecological harm( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/green-tip-of-the-day-buy-organic-cotton-or-used-clothing )
While the co-op hopes to attract volunteers to help run events, stock shelves and do media promotions, she stressed that volunteer labour is not a sustainable solution going forward.
"Some people are thinking we can reduce our paid staff by half and replace it by unpaid labour ... That's not a functional program."
If there is enthusiasm to try to keep the co-op alive, there may be a second meeting to brainstorm on funding ideas, but she called this the co-op's "one-last-shot kind of moment."
"We need to know if people feel it's at its organic end; if they look at the data and decide its time has come. Or if we have a really great turnout at this meeting and people bring their energy and their ideas and they are willing to offer time, then we can take one last look and see if there is a chance."
The special general assembly will be held on Thursday, Jan. 16 at 7:15 p.m. at the Coop la Maison Verte, 5785 Sherbrooke St. W.
mlalonde@postmedia.com( mailto:mlalonde@postmedia.com )

