Good morning and welcome to the Saturday-before-Fête-St-Jean edition of While You Were Sleeping.
Property purchased and lost - Quebec land deals gone very, very bad: The letter that Rosemary Lafrenière received in the mail in 2017 read like a bad joke. "We are pleased to inform you that the city of Montreal wants to be owner of two pieces of land show (sic) on the plan," the two-sentence missive from Montreal's real estate transaction division said. The next sentence invited her to sign a document that was attached and return it by post or email. The two pieces were vacant lots that Lafrenière had bought at public auction in 1986 with the hope of making a few bucks on resale down the road. Her parcels covered a bit more than an acre inside a 25-acre field in Pointe-aux-Trembles. So how much was the city offering Lafrenière to acquire her lots 30 years later? Nothing. Read Linda Gyulai's full report here
Out-of-control fire the size of 40,000 football fields is burning in Quebec: Wind and unabating heat have whipped a forest fire into an inferno north of Lac-Saint-Jean, unleashing pillars of smoke visible from space. SOPFEU, the provincial forest fire authority, declared earlier this week that the fire was "out of control." Dry weather and gusting winds on Thursday accelerated the blaze. It grew from 4,000 hectares that day to over 21,000 on Friday - about the size of 40,000 football fields.
Erin O'Toole camp seeks police probe, accuses MacKay camp of theft: Conservative leadership candidate Erin O'Toole's campaign says it has filed a formal complaint with police seeking an investigation of his rival Peter MacKay's organization. In a release late Friday, O'Toole's campaign says the complaint involves the theft of confidential campaign and strategy data.
Via Rail to require passengers to wear face masks as of Tuesday: Via Rail says passengers will be required to wear masks as of Tuesday to reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19 when physical distancing can't be maintained. The Montreal-based passenger rail service says it is making the change as ridership increases with the gradual reopening of the economy. The policy is in line with Transport Canada guidelines for wearing face coverings for planes, trains, ships and public transit. Masks are mandatory for employees who interact with customers. Masks must be worn throughout trips, except for when eating or drinking and when physical distancing is not possible in stations and at boarding. Via Rail says it will have a limited number of disposable masks available for passengers who don't have one at boarding.
Cineplex will not require moviegoers to wear masks: Despite at least one major U.S. theatre operator doing an about-face after a public outcry over its plan to open with a mask-optional policy, Cineplex is saying it will not make masks mandatory. The theatre chain announced its plans June 15 to begin opening cinemas, detailing reserved seating and social distancing requirements for staff and patrons, but made no reference to face coverings. In a statement to The Hollywood reporter on Friday, it said, "Taking the lead from public health authorities and provincial guidelines, we are not requiring guests to wear masks, but they are welcome to do so if they wish."
Sources: Canadian Press, Montreal Gazette
Related
Quebec to post historic $14.9B deficit in 2020-2021 as virus ravages economy
Stu Cowan: A simple wish for Father's Day - good health
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, our weekday live blog synthesizes the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Review the updates for June 19 here
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here

