An improperly extinguished campfire is the likely cause behind a major forest fire in Quebec's Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean region that remains out of control, Quebec's forestry minister told a news briefing on Sunday.
"This photo is possibly where fire started," Pierre Dufour told reporters in Roberval, holding up a photo of a campfire surrounded by charred land.
"In this case, it wasn't someone with a chalet, it was someone in a boat who'd probably stopped to camp with a tent and lit a fire that wasn't properly extinguished."
Dufour said it serves as an example why citizens need to heed authorities when they ask open fires not be lit - given the enormous amount of damage it can cause.
An open fire ban was renewed in regions across the province on Friday ahead of the St-Jean Baptiste holiday coming up next week.
Dufour and Municipal Affairs Minister Andrée Laforest, who is the minister responsible for the region, toured the area by helicopter on Sunday.
Laforest called the intense hot spell unprecedented for the region, but said she was hopeful that rain forecast would assist firefighters.
The aggressive forest fire was on the move Sunday, but efforts by firefighters on the ground and a change in winds towards the north means a Hydro-Quebec power plant in the area would be spared.
The fire, which started in Chutes-des-Passes, 160 kilometres north of Saguenay, has grown steadily, ravaging an area of 62,396 hectares on Sunday, double the size compared to Friday.
Authorities set up 10 road blocks, closing off an area of 100 kilometres by 80 kilometres, and urged anyone in the sparsely populated area to leave.
The fire is the largest of 18 forest fires in the province as of Sunday. Their impact was felt as far away as Montreal, where Environment Canada issued a smog warning Sunday afternoon because of a peat fire in the Kamouraska area. Smog particularly affects asthmatic children and people with respiratory ailments or heart disease.
"The biggest concern with this fire, as usually is with out-of-control fires, is the weather," said Mélanie Morin, a spokesperson for SOPFEU, the agency that oversees forest fire prevention in the province. "This fire started Tuesday and has consistently grown day after day despite our suppression efforts."
Her organization has made several targeted strikes to protect strategic points like bridges, certain outfitters and the Péribonka IV hydroelectric station. The flames were only 1.2 kilometres from the station on Sunday morning.
Morin said they are patrolling the area, doing strategic attacks and have set up a sprinkler system near the installation.
Maxence Huard-Lefebvre, a spokesman for Hydro-Québec, said they are monitoring the situation closely, but there is no concern for any community being impacted by a power outage. Huard-Lefebvre added the installation is well protected against fire, built into the rock and partially underground.
Péribonka is dormant as a preventative measure but it's one of more than 60 stations that are linked as part of an interconnected network.
About 100 employees of SOPFEU, and about 60 forest firefighters are battling the blaze with another 18 reinforcements ready, and about 200 more arriving on Monday, said Josée Poitras, another SOPFEU spokesperson.
Explosive development of a wildfire north of Lake Saint-Jean in Quebec, Canada.
- CIRA (@CIRA_CSU) June 19, 2020
"There are many chalets in the area and the two affected regional county municipalities, Maria-Chapdelaine and the Fjord-du-Saguenay, have been scrambling since the start of this fire to reach the owners of these chalets," said Poitras.
"There are chalets that have burned down. Fortunately, there are no casualties and no one has been trapped by the fire."
Another fire in a bog near Rivière-Ouelle, in the Lower St. Lawrence region, forced the evacuation of nearby homes after winds created a smoky haze.
Municipal firefighters responded along with SOPFEU teams to that fire, which covered about 326 hectares on Saturday.
The provincial agency reports 450 fires this year - double the average of 228 by this time of year over the past decade.
Lightning strikes are considered the source of only three blazes - the vast majority have been caused by people.
With reporting by the Montreal Gazette
Related
Out-of-control fire the size of 40,000 football fields is burning in Quebec

