The first planeloads of exhausted and sometimes angry Canadians fleeing violence in Lebanon landed Friday in Ottawa and Montreal.
"We are very happy to be back in Canada," Prime Minister Stephen Harper said after saying goodbye to the refugees as they got off his government jet in Ottawa about 4 a.m. EDT.
The Prime Minister described the long flight from Cyprus, where the Canadians had been taken by boat from Beirut, as "very quiet." Mr. Harper had diverted his government jet from Paris to pick up the trapped Canadians.
The return to Ottawa and Montreal capped the first phase of the enormous operation to rescue thousands of Canadians from war-torn Beirut.
The pace of evacuations from Lebanon slowed Friday, however, partly because some of the ships chartered by the Canadian government earlier in the week were scooped up by other countries.
Foreign Affairs Department officials told a background briefing that 747 people were taken out of Lebanon on Friday, far short of the number awaiting departure.
Officials said they managed to secure two big boats for service on Saturday, with a combined capacity of almost 1,700 passengers. Still, the operation is hampered by congestion in Beirut harbour and the need to get through an Israeli naval blockade pf the coast.
"There are so many things beyong our control," said Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Kim Girtel. "It depends on how the blockade is working, how nervous the blockaders are, and the situation at the port."
The total number of persons taken out of Beirut rose to 2,413 on Friday, while the number of Lebanese-Canadians who had registered with the Canadian Embassy rose to 38,000, a sharp increase from the beginning of the week. It's not known how many of those want to leave the country.
Foreign Affairs officials acknowledged that a desire to save money may have hampered the evacuation.
"When this operation began we took a decision to contract ships for a certain number of days because we have no way of predicting out how long the crisis is going to last, how much demand were going to have," an official told a background briefing.
"Looking at the taxpayer's dollar, we dont want to contract ships for a week or two weeks without knowing the extent of the crisis so were being cautious in that respect.
"That means that some of the ships we may have used may have been picked up by others. It's not like we have a flotilla on standby."
About 600 other Canadians were put on planes in Turkey early today for the long journey home while chartered boats ferried hundreds of others by sea from Beirut as - after days of delay and embarrassment - the operation finally seemed to kick into gear.
Some of those who returned to Ottawa this morning with the Prime Minister praised the Canadian government, the Foreign Affairs Department and the staff of the PMO. Others complained they were treated like "animals" during parts of the 30-hour rescue operation.
"It was almost hell but, thank God, there were a lot of people who helped out," said Rima Saab, who was travelling with her two infant children.
The Prime Minister's staff "were so sweet," Ms. Saab said. "They didn't leave me for one bit. I always had one kid and a member of the staff had the other one. So they helped me to feed them and to change them and they carried them around for me."
But Liliane El-Helou, who had travelled to Lebanon with her two children to attend her brother's wedding, told of many people being left outside in Beirut for six hours in 30-degree heat.
"There were people who fainted. Then we went inside of a pavilion waiting to be shipped, like animals I felt," she said.
The passengers who accompanied Mr. Harper were mostly women with babies, children with backpacks and older Canadians, some of whom hobbled down the stairs to touch the ground.
Amal Younes, who is five months pregnant and was travelling with her daughter Yasmina, 3, said in Montreal she is "very angry" about the way they were treated on the trip.
"I was crying all the way."
"A lot of [these]people are very grateful," the Prime Minister said on the dark pre-dawn tarmac at the Ottawa airport. "A lot of [these]people are very frustrated. They had a long and difficult trip."
Mr. Harper praised Foreign Affairs Department staff, who he said had been working extremely hard, trying to cope with the massive number of Canadians trying to flee the fighting in Beirut.
He noted that the department was originally short of manpower in region but quickly pooled its resources.
The Prime Minister said he is concerned about the number of department staff working round the clock in Beirut, Cyprus and Turkey, where other refugees are being taken.
"I'm concerned that they are going to burn out before this is over," he said.
Confusion dominated the morning at Montreal's Pierre Elliott Trudeau Airport as waiting families complained about a lack of information.
Fadi Azar said he had not been told when his wife Amal Younes, who is five months pregnant, and their three-year-old daughter Yasmina were due to arrive.
"It was confusion until the last minute," Mr. Azar said as he hugged Yasmina to his chest minutes after the family was reunited.
"Nobody wanted to give us any information for security reasons. They [his family]were coming from a war zone, and we couldn't be told."
People were waiting at the airport from 5 a.m., unsure of when their relatives were due to arrive.
Abbas Haggali had expected his wife Mona Fadel their children Diana, 17, Maged, 11, and Mohammed, 10, to arrive Thursday and spent last night waiting at the airport, only to return this morning for another stint in the arrivals lounge.
"I don't know what's going on," said Mr. Haggali, whose father and four brothers died during battles in Lebanon. "They were in Beirut, in the bombing area. She left on the first day. I don't sleep. Nobody sleeps."
His eldest son Ayman, 21, had been on holiday with the rest of the family but came home early for work and study. The fighting broke out 10 hours after he left Lebanon, he said.
"It's been very difficult," Ayman Haggalisaid. "My mom waited from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. to get on the boat, and then they weren't going to take them. When they saw she had small children, they said okay."
Mrs. Fadel and the children were the first people to walk through the arrival gates, where they were welcomed by tearful family and a blaze of media Also in Montreal, Seventeen-year-old Samy Kaidbey said he watched the first morning of bombings hit Beirut from his balcony vantage-point outside the city.
"I was sleeping to the sound of bombs, waking to the sound of bombs. We could see the airport fully. I saw the explosions - it looked like in the movies," Mr. Kaidbey said.
Mr. Kaidbey had travelled alone to Lebanon to visit relatives after graduating from Saint Lambert du Rocher.
His worried parents watched television reports in their Montreal home, and his father Ihsan yesterday waited anxiously in Pierre Elliott Trudeau , unsure if his son would arrive with the first passengers.
As the pair was swamped by a media scrum that scurried from one family to the next, Samy said there were just two things he wanted: to get home to his mother, and to have a smoked meat sandwich from Schwartz's Delicatessen.
Earlier, more than 600 other Canadians from Beirut were put on two 757 jets in Turkey for the journey to Canada.
Meanwhile, while it will still be an arduous and terrifying journey taking several exhausting days for as many as 30,000 Canadians, the evacuation of Lebanon has turned into an efficient process, Canadian officials and escapees in Turkey declared today.
The second wave of as many as 2100 Canadians fleeing the war-torn country arrived starting just before sunset Friday in Turkey.
"It went smoothly - we were more or less testing the whole process, and we found that it's a lot of work, it's pretty intense, but it works," said Yves Brodeur, who as Canada's ambassador to Cyprus is head of the Turkish side of the operation to evacuate Canadians from Lebanon.
The Turkish officials who handle passport checks after the Canadians leave the boats were able to process about 300 people per hour, Mr. Brodeur said.
And while they are provided with a gymnasium filled with hundreds of mattresses should they need a lengthy stay, the longest anyone had to stay before being shuttled onto a flight was three hours, Mr. Brodeur said.
"It's been good, but it's taxing for these families. It's taxing for our staff and volunteers, too - people get very tired, they're working 24, 36 hours without a break. It's very tiring and in fact it's emotionally draining - these families have been through an awful lot and they're very frustrated and in some cases sick. You help them as best as you can."
He said that it would be impossible to add more ships to the Turkish side of the operation without forcing ships to idle in the harbour for inhumane lengths of time.
However, Canadian officials said they will be adding ships to the evacuation in Cyprus.
About 700 soldiers from Canadian Forces Base Trenton in Ontario will also be added to Cyprus. Mr. Brodeur said that the Turkish operation is badly in need of more staff, though the assistance of Turkish officials has kept it from getting bogged down the way the Cyprus operation was two days ago.
"All our security, medical support and transportation is provided by the Turks - they're being very generous."
On Thursday, six boats left Beirut heading for Turkey, filled with hundreds of Canadians who had been stranded in the shattered city. The sense of order on the docks was in stark contrast to Wednesday's debacle, when a paucity of boats and the excess of promises had created a minor riot among Canadians, some of whom had been waiting in the harbour area for days, enduring terrifying bombing.
Evacuees arrived at the port in Beirut in buses chartered by the Canadian embassy and then filed onto the boats in polite, orderly, very Canadian lines. "That was quite a feat, quite extraordinary," said Canada's ambassador to Lebanon, Louis de Lorimier.
The ships that left Thursday were Turkish island-cruising ferries with 250 red-and-blue seats on two levels and even well-stocked snack bars. But most pleasing of all to evacuees who had spent the night in cramped conditions with overflowing toilets were the clean washrooms. A seventh ship, which travelled to Cyprus Wednesday night with the first load of evacuees, was unable to make a return journey Thursday.
After a long wait on the tarmac in Cyprus, Mr. Harper welcomed the beleaguered guests - some of whom were critical of the government's slow response to the crisis in Lebanon - onto his plane. They complained of dehydration, widespread vomiting from sea sickness, cramped quarters and a lack of medical care on the trip over from Beirut.
While the operation ran more smoothly Thursday, it wasn't fast enough for many desperate Canadians who may be forced to wait for days to get out on a ship. An angry crowd of Canadian passport-holders gathered outside the port, demanding to be put on the ships.
Lina Diyab, a Halifax lawyer, complained that after being told to come to the port, she had been left to stand in the sweltering heat for seven hours without any further word from the embassy despite the fact she is allergic to the sun.
"Somebody is going to answer for this. We deserve better treatment," she said to cheers from a crowd of several hundred people with similar complaints.
Foreign Affairs Minister Peter MacKay declared Thursday's evacuation a success.
Ottawa, which announced a $1-million aid package for Lebanon Thursday, has not been able to put a price tag on the massive rescue.
There is much concern for people still trapped in the southern part of the country where the danger is greatest, and where a family of eight Canadians was killed on the weekend.
Mr. MacKay said again Thursday that there is a plan to get citizens out but he refused to elaborate.
The government reacted angrily to a report in Thursday's Globe and Mail that micromanagement by the Prime Minister's Office contributed to confusion and delays surrounding the evacuation of Canadians from Beirut.
Mr. MacKay leaped to the defence of the PMO and strongly criticized the story in a letter to the editor that he released to other media.
The report said there were not enough staff at the Canadian embassy in Beirut to cope with the thousands of frantic Canadians seeking help and described the difficulties in organizing an evacuation by water when there were no Canadian naval vessels in the area and many countries were bidding for the same commercial ships.
Federal sources said the situation was exacerbated by the Prime Minister's centralized command and communications policies and an edict from Sandra Buckler, the Prime Minister's communications director, that no information be released on the evacuation efforts.
"The very serious allegations you printed are completely untrue and without merit," Mr. MacKay stated.
Edward Greenspon, The Globe and Mail's editor-in-chief, said he appreciates the pressure the government is feeling in the current crisis, but that the story was well-sourced and stands up to scrutiny. "We have complete confidence in our story," he said.
[Click here for the complete text of Mr. MacKay's letter ]/p>
The Canadians who arrived Thursday at the Turkish port of Mersin were greeted by Turkish and Canadian officials, and seemed in good spirits despite the long journey.
Turkey has become a major focus of the rescue operation.
Canadian Ambassador Yves Brodeur arrived in Mersin with a team of 75 diplomats and Foreign Affairs officials to set up a huge processing centre in the nearby city of Adana.
Ottawa dramatically increased its investment in the rescue effort Thursday. As well as the two 800-passenger ferries and four 250-passenger small ferries it rented Thursday, officials in Cyprus said they will be supplementing the single boat that has delivered a few Canadians to Larnaca with several more rented boats.
Turkey has provided a large, air-conditioned basketball stadium that will serve as a processing centre for the Canadians. Last night, it was full of small children and exhausted parents, eagerly receiving food, diapers and phone cards from Canadian officials. Ottawa has chartered one Boeing 757 jet, and plans to add at least four more to provide free passage.
In Ontario, the provincial government said Friday Canadians returning to the province from Lebanon will have immediate access to public health care.
The province said it will exempt those people from the mandatory three-month waiting period for OHIP coverage.
Health Minister George Smitherman says the evacuees have undergone strain and stress and will have access to the "health care they need when they need it the most."

