After three Montreal men were found dead in their cars in separate but remarkably similar circumstances after a heavy snowstorm one day last March, a Quebec coroner is urging public health authorities to do more to raise public awareness of the dangers of carbon monoxide poisoning.
The three men - aged 59, 75 and 88 - were discovered in different parts of the city dead or unconscious in their cars on March 16, 2017. In each case, the men had been shovelling snow to access their cars, and had apparently taken a break from shovelling by sitting in their still snowbound vehicles with engines running and windows closed.
Carbon monoxide poisoning was the culprit in each case, coroner Paul G. Dionne ruled in reports made public recently by the Quebec Coroner's office.
Public health authorities warn that a snowbound car's engine should never be turned on before the exhaust pipe and the sides of the car are completely cleared of snow. When the exhaust pipe or the sides of the car are blocked by snow, lethal levels of carbon monoxide can seep into the car's interior from underneath the vehicle.
On the morning of March 15, after a storm dumped about 35 centimetres of snow on Montreal, neighbours noticed 88-year-old John Malachy Toal shovelling a path to his 1999 Toyota Corolla, parked in front of his residence on 16th Ave. in Lachine.
Later that afternoon, a neighbour noticed a shovel near Toal's still snowbound car and placed it near the door of his apartment. Toal's body was not discovered in the car until the following morning, March 16, by a passerby. He was pronounced dead at the scene by Urgences-Santé paramedics.
Although the motor was not running when Toal's body was discovered, the ignition key was in the "on" position. Police did not verify the state of the battery or the gas tank, but the coroner concluded the motor was likely running at the time of death.
"Toxicology results showed carbon monoxide poisoning," writes Dionne in his report. "It is likely that Mr. Toal was resting for a few minutes in his old car, with the motor running, during his efforts to shovel his car out on the morning of March 15, 2017. The carbon monoxide emissions probably passed through the floor, since the car was buried in snow."
Hansen Howard-Thomas, 75, was found unconscious in his idling vehicle, a 2008 Hyundai Elantra, at about 11:24 a.m. on March 16. He was brought to the Royal Victoria Hospital where efforts to resuscitate him failed and he was pronounced dead. An autopsy showed Howard-Thomas had an existing heart condition. The coroner concluded Howard-Thomas probably had a heart issue while shovelling and took a rest in his car, which was idling and still covered in snow. Again, carbon monoxide poisoning was deemed the cause of death.
And that same afternoon, police were called to St. Michel Blvd. in Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie, where a man, later identified as 59-year-old Joël Nicolas, was found dead in his 1992 Plymouth Voyager. The car was covered in snow and a shovel was found nearby. The engine was not running when Nicolas was found, but rescuers noticed a strong gasoline odour when the car was opened and leaked fluid under the vehicle. An autopsy indicated Nicolas had died of carbon monoxide poisoning.
In each of these three cases, the coroner noted that the cars were older models (1992-2008). Older cars tend to produce more carbon monoxide emissions than newer models. Experts advise motorists to have their vehicles regularly serviced, including checking for leaks in the exhaust system or holes in the undercarriage.
The Montreal Children's Hospital Children issued a warning( http://montrealgazette.com/news/how-to-avoid-carbon-monoxide-poisoning-after-a-heavy-snowfall ) last month never to leave children in idling cars while snow shovelling. For more information, go to bit.ly/2GfYDGV.( http://www.thechildren.com/health-info/conditions-and-illnesses/preventing-carbon-monoxide-co-poisoning-winter )
mlalonde@postmedia.com( mailto:mlalonde@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Michelle Lalonde, Montreal Gazette

