David Phillips isn't pulling any punches: "The weather's gotten weird and wild and wacky and variable. The climate has changed."
The senior climate scientist for Environment Canada revealed his top 10 weather stories for 2018, and Quebec was affected by more than half of them, from a cruel winter to windstorms to a deadly heat wave to tornadoes to a spring and fall that were missing in action.
"It was almost a smorgasbord of everything that could go wrong," Phillips said. "I don't think there was anything missing."
He named smoke as Canada's top weather story this year. A cold spring delayed the start of fire season. But once it warmed up, it didn't take long for sparks to strike( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/forest-fires-a-primer-on-what-not-to-do-on-your-vacation ).
There were more than 250,000 lightning strikes in southern British Columbia between April and August. On one day alone there were 20,000. The resulting huge wildfires thickened skies from coast to coast with smoke that could be detected as far away as Europe.
While factors including forestry practices and urban spread influence the effects of wildfires, Phillips said it comes down to weather.
"This is too dry, too hot, for too long."
Speaking of hot, Canada took full part in a global heat wave that involved four continents. It was Phillips's No. 2 story.
"It's a big country, Canada, and you don't often see people experiencing the same weather from Vancouver Island to Bonavista (in Newfoundland), but this year we saw that with record temperatures."
In Quebec, 93 people died from heat-related causes( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-prepares-for-hottest-recorded-canada-day-as-heat-wave-rolls-in ). July 1 in Ottawa set records for heat and humidity and the conditions cut Canada Day attendance to 6,000 from an expected 20,000. Moose Jaw, Sask., reached 42.3 C one day in August.
But it wasn't all smoke and heat. Phillips said the No. 3 story was the disappearance of spring and fall, "the almost non-existence of the transition seasons."
A long, cold spring kept frost in the ground as deep as two metres in some places, which meant a late start to the crop year for farmers. Then, with the fields ready in August and a nice start to the harvest, unprecedented snow crushed hopes. More than $4 billion worth of crop was flattened under record snowfall.
Where else did Quebec measure up? It's No. 4 on the list with a devastating May windstorm( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/strong-winds-could-cause-damage-friday-environment-canada-warns ) that saw hundreds of thousands of people left without power here and in Ontario. Winds gusted up to 94 kilometres per hour and knocked down trees and Hydro poles.
At No. 5, a twisters ripped through the Gatineau and Ottawa regions( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/multiple-homes-damaged-in-dunrobin-possible-tornado/wcm/2678a04d-42c2-4405-89d2-6612b0477aec ), flattening homes and causing millions of dollars of damage.
"You could hear things ripping. The wind was just amazingly strong," said a Gatineau resident( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/evacuations-in-gatineau-following-severe-weather-and-tornado-watch ). "It was intimidating and scary."
We also made the list at Nos. 9 and 10 - cold, long winter, and the cruellest April - the cruellest( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/fish-and-birds-die-in-magog-pet-shop-because-of-low-temperatures ) we've seen in 71 years.
Like most climatologists, Phillips is circumspect about blaming any one weather event on climate change, but he did say that despite a long, colder-than-normal winter, Canada was again slightly warmer than usual - the 22nd year in a row of above-normal temperatures.
"Scientists have kind of shown the fact that these things are directly related to human activity," he said.
Phillips has been drawing up Top 10 weather lists for 23 years. Some years, he confesses, there wasn't much to talk about.
"There weren't a lot of things happening back then. Summers were hot, winters were cold. In 23 years, it has changed," he said.
A man and woman embrace as they survey the damage to a home in Gatineau Sept. 23, 2018. Houses and Apartment buildings had roofs torn off and windows blown out and automobiles were damaged after a tornado caused extensive damage.
The top 10 weather events for 2018
1. Smoky skies: Driven by hot, dry conditions, the number of fires was higher than last year and the area burned was double the 25-year averages. Smoke from wildfires in British Columbia and down the Pacific Coast to California darkened skies and soured air for more than 10 million Canadians.
2. Canada and the global heat wave: It was hot from coast to coast. Canada Day in Ottawa was the second-warmest in more than 130 years. Three Saskatchewan cities broke all-time records with temperatures into the 40s C. In Quebec, 93 people died from heat-related causes.
3. Spring and fall disappear: The coldest April on record slammed into the hottest-ever May. A few months later, the Prairie harvest ground to a halt when 30 centimetres of snow fell in some areas in September and October.
4. Billion-dollar windstorm: Hundreds of thousands in Quebec and Ontario were left without power in May as 120-km/h winds snapped power poles, damaged homes and hurled tree branches into vehicles like armour-piercing spears. The clean-up tab is estimated at more than $1 billion.
5. Ottawa tornadoes: A series of tornadoes tore up the boundary region between Ontario and Quebec on Sept. 21. One of them was the most powerful recorded anywhere in North America last summer. Insurance costs are expected to be about $307 million.
6. British Columbia floods: A snowpack nearly twice the norm, a wet spring and high late-spring temperatures produced flooding in several river valleys in southern B.C. Almost 5,000 people were forced from their homes by river levels not seen in 50 years.
7. Fast flooding in New Brunswick: Floods on the Saint John River are an old story, but even old-timers were surprised by the speed of the water in 2018. Deep snow, heavy rains and sudden heat created the largest, most damaging flood in modern New Brunswick history down river of Fredericton in April and May. The Reversing Falls stopped reversing.
8. Toronto's tiny, perfect storm: On Aug. 7, a compact storm dumped 58 millimetres of rain downtown and 72 millimetres on Toronto Island, while the suburbs and the airport got almost nothing. Two men nearly drowned in an underground parking elevator and Blue Jays baseball fans got rained on despite the closed roof at Rogers Centre.
9. Cold start, long winter: Six months of it. Albertans faced wind-chill cold of -45 C on New Year's Eve. In early January, Toronto was colder than Tuktoyaktuk, N.W.T.
10. The cruellest month: Nationally, it was the coldest April in 16 years and in 71 years if you lived through it in Ontario and Quebec. In those provinces the misery was compounded with up to 12 centimetres of freezing rain, snow and ice pellets. Windows on Parliament Hill were smashed. The CN Tower was closed after Rogers Centre was bombed by ice falling from the tower.
Related
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )
Step through the looking glass to 2018 Year in Review( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/2018-year-in-review )

