ST-SAUVEUR - Premier François Legault says he personally deleted many of the anti-Muslim hate messages posted by internet trolls on his Facebook page( https://www.facebook.com/FrancoisLegaultPremierMinistre/ ) following this week's memorial to the victims of the attack on the Quebec City mosque three years ago.
"Wednesday night I started doing it myself," Legault told reporters Friday. "I didn't like what I saw, honestly. And then I asked people, because I have to sleep, to continue the work. (I said) We have to manage and erase those messages as soon as possible."
Legault was unable to say exactly how many hate messages found their way into the comments section of his page which is open to the public and managed by him and his staff. Later, an aide confirmed to The Montreal Gazette it was "hundreds," and the staff was busy all night trying to keep up with the flood.
The aide said they decided to not remove Legault's initial message calling for tolerance - which is still posted - because it would appear the government was caving in.
"It would be like they win," an official said. "It's the risk you run when you post something. You can't really control social media."
Emerging for a news conference after a two day Coalition Avenir Québec caucus meeting, Legault appeared shaken and annoyed with what had happened, noting it was the "first time I see so many."
"We never know if it's only a few people under different names," Legault said. "It's tough to say how many people are concerned. But it's unacceptable and I don't like to see that at all."
Asked about comments he made at the pre-winter caucus meeting in Gatineau a year earlier that he did not believe Islamophobia exists( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/muslim-group-demands-retraction-from-legault-over-islamophobia-comment ) in Quebec, Legault said he continues to believe Quebecers "are not racist or Islamophobic people."
"I think there are some cases, there are a few people that like to send those hate messages but still I don't think that it represents the Quebec people," Legault said.
He was cautious in responding to comments made earlier by his minister for government digital transformation, Éric Caire. He said Quebec has to find a technological way to stop such behaviour because education sensitization programs are not enough.
"I think we have to look with police at how we can better manage social media," Legault said. "If there is something we can do it's around that. Of course, we cannot do that alone but, besides, I think you will always have a few people that you cannot control and that's a terrible thing, an unacceptable thing."
Earlier Friday, Robert Pigeon, the Quebec City police chief, told reporters whenever stories involving the Muslim community make the news there is invariably an increase in hate incidents such as what happened to Legault's Facebook page.
The third anniversary of the Quebec City mosque attack was Wednesday. Pigeon noted the Sûreté du Québec also monitors Legault's Facebook page at all times.
Legault posted his message just after the ceremony last week at the mosque he attended.
The message said: "We thought this kind of event was not possible in Quebec. Having a father, husband or brother ripped away from us because of intolerance and hate.
"We are united here this evening to remind ourselves that our people are not sheltered from this kind of hate. But this hate is not that of Quebec. The real face of Quebec is that of the people the day after this tragedy who gathered to show their solidarity."
Legault revealed he tried he to remove the messages himself at the end of a news conference that started with him saying he did not want to dramatize the incident. Last November, he himself touted Facebook as a good tool for measuring public opinion( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/legault-dismisses-critics-of-immigration-reforms-saying-he-has-support-on-facebook ).
"If you look on my Facebook, for example, 90 per cent of the people agree with what we are doing," Legault said then in reference to his immigration reforms.
He said he did not think this week's messages went so far as inciting violence that could make it a criminal matter so he did not report it to police.
"I am convinced it is a very small minority hiding behind social media which has hateful, intolerant," he said. "It is my duty as premier to denounce these hate messages and say what is happening is unacceptable."
He expressed doubt about enacting a recommendation of the Quebec human rights commission a few years ago, which suggested the government adopted a policy to fight racism and hate acts.
"I don't think a law can impede a few intolerant people, to settle all these problems," he said. "The great majority of Quebecers are tolerant, respectful and welcoming.
"Let's not let a few people change the harmony we have living together, which is the envy of people all over the world, the social peace we have in Quebec."
Other ministers in his cabinet also expressed frustration about the incident earlier in the day, but appeared at a loss on how to stop it from happening.
"We have to denounce these messages," Immigration Minister Simon Jolin-Barrette told reporters. "We are an open society, a tolerant society. And there's no space for that kind of messages. And all messages like that are not tolerable. Such behaviour is unacceptable ... and we have to find a way to make people responsible and pay for what they say."
"You know, stupid people are stupid people," Caire said. "And there's a limit on what education can do. That's why I said yes to education, but we need to find other means to stop those people for whom education is not the response for what they do."
He did not elaborate.
"It's dreadful. It is unacceptable," said Transport Minister François Bonnardel. "We have to deplore, deplore, deplore loud and strong."
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/philipauthier( http://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Related
Quebec City remembers 2017 mosque attack with emotional ceremony( https://montrealgazette.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/solemn-events-to-mark-third-anniversary-of-quebec-city-mosque-shooting/wcm/f83194db-1ff7-4bc8-b719-f2e1c7b70a18 )
Three years on: Remembering the victims of the 2017 mosque shooting( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/three-years-on-remembering-the-victims-of-the-2017-mosque-shooting )
Quebec mosque shooting: Victims are healing - each at their own pace( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-mosque-shooting-victims-are-healing-each-at-their-own-pace )

