With a snowstorm bearing down on Montreal, thousands of West Island homeowners, many of them elderly, have been left in the lurch after one of the area's largest snow removal companies( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/snow-removal-signs-vandalized-in-dorval ) has ceased operations.
Marc Guindon, the owner of Bo-Pelouse, sent an email to employees announcing the abrupt closing: "Hello, it is with a heavy heart that I must let you all know that after trying my hardest, Bo-Pelouse will be ceasing its operations after 30 years. I had hopes even today that I might be able to continue but unfortunately it will not be possible on my own. I wish that you all may find employment rapidly and wish you all bright futures. With deep sadness."
Guindon had gained the trust of many customers and suppliers after operating in Pointe-Claire and Dorval for decades.
After a small snowfall before Christmas, 26 tractor drivers fuelled up at Frank Mancuso's garage on Donegani Ave., as they have done for the last 20 years. But Mancuso suspected something was amiss when Guindon failed to pay him and didn't return a phone call.
"It's very sad," said Mancuso, who owns Donegani Service Station Inc. "It's a lot of money. We have a lot of customers who are older and they paid (Bo-Pelouse) in advance. The drivers didn't know anything and a lot of them haven't been paid."
Guindon worked hard over the years and had a lot of responsibility, Mancuso said.
The Bo Pelouse offices on Monday, Dec. 30, had a notice about the holiday season, but no announcement that they're ceasing operations.
Pointe-Claire city councillor Eric Stork, a friend of Guindon's, posted Guindon's email message to staff on his Facebook page because he wanted to make citizens aware of "this unfortunate situation."
In the same post, Stork told residents they would have to make their own arrangements to clear the estimated 15-20 centimetres of snow expected by Tuesday.
The company has about 5,500 customers in Pointe-Claire, Dorval and Beaconsfield.
Guindon could not be reached for comment.
However, on Monday afternoon, he posted a message on a website( https://www.bo-pelouse.com/ ) apologizing for letting down his customers. "For the last 4 years the company was struggling but I was always able to get it back on track." he wrote. "I was still in discussions and trying to find a solution yesterday. I have lived, participated, donated, created employment and raised my family in this community. I know that some of you are as angry and disappointed as am I."
He said rumours that he had taken money and moved abroad are false.
The sudden closure had hundreds of Guindon's customers scrambling to sign a snow removal contract with one of his competitors.
John Bradley turned up outside the company's office on Donegani Ave. after a neighbour told him that Bo-Pelouse had shut down its operations. The office was closed and there was a message posted outside saying: "We are closed for the holidays from Dec. 31 to Jan. 3. We are open during snow removal operations. Happy Holidays."
Bradley, 59, said he paid the company $275 in October to have snow cleared from his driveway in Pointe-Claire because his stepbrother has a bad back and can no longer shovel.
"I have COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)," he said. "If I do anything to exert (myself), I am done."
Bradley's elderly father has colon cancer and they can't afford to pay another snow removal company because they're on a fixed income.
He said he's disappointed that he hasn't received an email or a phone call from the company.
Donald Chainey said the company has provided a good service during the three years he has been with them. He paid $175 upfront this summer to get an early bird special and fears he won't get his money back.
Rumours of the firm's demise have been circulating in the West Island for a few days.
The owners of Grizzly snow removal, Bo-Pelouse's main competitor in Pointe-Claire, called in several family members Monday to handle 500 emails and hundreds of phone calls from people desperate to obtain a snow removal contract.
Alanna Roszkowski, co-owner of DLC Landscaping, which purchased Grizzly in 2017, said they were shocked by the demise of their rival. She said her husband began receiving text messages from former Bo-Pelouse drivers over the weekend.
Grizzly hopes to be able to service about 1,000 new customers in Pointe-Claire after they take care of their existing customers, she said. They have hired several Bo-Pelouse drivers and are renting tractors from a supplier on Highway 40 to do the work. It costs about $255 a year to clear a double driveway.
The owner of another West Island snow removal company said he began hearing rumours from drivers that Bo-Pelouse was in financial trouble.
The snow removal contractor, who operates in Dollard-des-Ormeaux and Pierrefonds, said he doesn't have enough equipment to take on any of Bo-Pelouse's customers for the upcoming snowstorm.
"I have to take care of my own customers," said Marc-Antoine Tozzi, owner of Syljack. "After the storm, we will see what happens. We are too busy to make a move at the last minute."
However, a landscaping company called Southwest Garden and Snow, said it's preparing a service route for homeowners in western Pointe-Claire. "Please be patient, we will have a competitive price in play for the balance of the season," says a message on the firm's Facebook page.
Last winter, Bo-Pelouse made headlines( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/snow-removal-signs-vandalized-in-dorval ) after about 72 of the firm's driveway markers went missing in Dorval.
Norm Aubé, who owns a record store next door to Bo-Pelouse's office, said he was surprised to learn that the company has closed. He said he saw Guindon about 10 days ago and nothing seemed amiss.
"A lot of customers were very happy with the service," he said.
Related
Snow removal signs vandalized in Dorval( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/snow-removal-signs-vandalized-in-dorval )
Flights cancelled, roads ice over as snow and freezing rain menace Montreal( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/flights-cancelled-at-trudeau-airport-ahead-of-major-snowfall-freezing-rain )

