Xavier Fulton slept in Sunday morning and said he doesn't own a cellphone.
The Alouettes' offensive-tackle was unaware of the temporary storm created on social media when he was released because his name was "mistakenly included" in a release of transactions the team dispatched. But his wife fielded a flood of calls.
"I'll be honest, I missed a good portion of all that craziness," he said following Monday's practice, laughing. "That's the nature of this business. When that time comes, it comes. But as long as I'm here, I'm going to give everything I have. Make sure I'm on top of my game."
When the Als legitimately released left offensive-tackle Jovan Olafioye on the day before training camp last month, and then Fulton, who has been practicing with the starting offence most of training camp, it raised eyebrows.
For the record, general manager Kavis Reed on Monday said it was a clerical error that won't happen again and shouldn't have occurred. He and the organization apologized to Fulton.
Offensive-tackle Xavier Fulton.
The 6-foot-5, 287-pound Fulton is expected to protect the blind side of first-string quarterback Drew Willy Saturday night, when the Als launch their regular season at Vancouver. But nothing's set in stone. Indeed, the team utilized numerous combinations up front on Monday, still seeking the strongest five-man unit.
Potentially hampering the decision is right-guard Ryan Bomben recovering from a broken right hand and working with a cast, making his status questionable. Head coach Mike Sherman said the line remains a work in progress.
"It's tough to play with a cast on the offensive line," Sherman said. "You use that hand as a guide hand a lot of times. You're not holding, but the extension of your fingers braces you a bit. That'll be a challenge, but I've had players play with casts before."
Willy, who played the entire first half on Saturday against Hamilton, as well as one series of the third quarter, was sacked twice. Fulton didn't have his best game and, on one play, was driven back into Willy by defensive-end Adrian Tracy.
"My footing was all over the place," admitted the 31-year-old, a seven-year Canadian Football League veteran who has played for Saskatchewan and the Tiger-Cats. "It wasn't pretty, but I knew where I was going. It was just getting there. It seemed like I was getting in my own way a lot.
"I'm penciled into the (left-tackle) spot. I've played this game for a long time. Maybe I've lost a step or two in some ways, but my game wisdom has allowed me to maintain that level of game speed and intensity."
Willy, who was under pressure despite the Ticats leaving a number of their starters at home, predictably said he believes the line will come together.
"We'll get it figured out," he said. "They want to keep me protected. I know the effort's going to be there. I know they're going to fight to the end for me."
It behooves the Als to keep Willy healthy and upright. His backup, Matt Shiltz, has a muscular problem in his lower back and is expected to miss two games. That means Antonio Pipkin, a rookie who briefly played in the last 2017 regular-season game, becomes Willy's understudy.
In other news, veteran rush-end John Bowman was limited on Monday due to an ankle injury. The Als still are hopeful he'll play against the Lions.
Defensive-back Greg Henderson, who played 11 games last season for Montreal, has been released along with defensive-tackle Alan-Michael Cash and receiver Jamal Robinson, who was acquired from Hamilton along with Bomben. Cash might resurface on the practice roster in the future.
hzurkowsky@postmedia.com( mailto:hzurkowsky@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1( http://twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1 )
Related
Kirby Fabien could boost Canadian content on Alouettes' offensive line( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/kirby-fabien-could-boost-canadian-content-on-alouettes-offensive-line )
Alouettes' Ryan Bomben moves on from trade shock, focuses on new season( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/football/cfl/montreal-alouettes/alouettes-ryan-bomben-moves-on-from-trade-shock-focuses-on-new-season )
CREDIT: Herb Zurkowsky, Montreal Gazette

