The owner of the Meadowbrook Golf Course has won a case in Quebec Superior Court ordering Montreal to bury a creek that is the last remnant of the St-Pierre River, which once wound its way from Mount Royal to Old Montreal.
But even though it won, developer Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific Inc. is appealing the ruling to ensure that the Quebec environment department cannot block the judgment from being carried out.
Judge Chantal Corriveau ruled on June 7 that the city must apply for a permit from the Quebec environment department "to undertake work to put an end to all contamination by the Meadowbrook creek ... by covering it over, diverting it or other measures to stop the flow of contaminated water within four months of the present judgment and complete the work within 18 months."
The winding, 200-metre creek emerges from a storm sewer pipe at one end of the 57-hectare green space and disappears into a stone culvert at the other end.
Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific had sued the city, saying it is nothing but an open-air sewer and should be "capped" (diverted underground into a sewer).
But environmentalists say turning the last surviving section of the river into a sewer would cause a loss of biodiversity and destroy a rare and precious natural feature of the landscape.
"It's a historic river," said Louise Legault, director of Les Amis du Parc Meadowbrook, pointing to a worldwide trend to revive lost urban rivers.
"A lot of cities now daylight rivers - they don't cover them," she said.
The group says the creek should be cleaned up, not buried, and is calling on Quebec environment minister Isabelle Melançon to refuse Montreal a permit for the work.
Melançon's press attaché, Anne-Hélène Couturier, said neither the environment minister nor her department would comment since the matter is before the courts.
The city of Montreal acknowledged during the court case that the creek is contaminated but said the cause of the problem is crossed sewer and wastewater pipes in Côte-St-Luc and Montreal West that are diverting household sewer waste into the storm sewer that flows into the creek. It claimed that the other two municipalities had not cooperated with its efforts to solve the problem.
However, Montreal was unsuccessful in convincing the court that Côte St-Luc and Montreal West should also be named as defendants in the case.
Les Amis du Parc Meadowbrook demonstrated at Côte St-Luc city council meeting Monday night to ask that city to join Montreal in solving the contamination problem at the source so the river can be saved.
Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific Inc. said in the lawsuit that it had been complaining to the city since 2012 that the creek is contaminated. In addition to eliminating the creek, the city should be forced to decontaminate the land around it, it argued.
The judge agreed - saying the city must clean the land around the creek to remove all traces of fecal coliforms and other contaminants within 24 months, as well as pay all legal costs.
In an appeal filed Thursday, Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific says it is filing in case the provincial environment department decides not to authorize Montreal to bury the river. It asks the court to "modify the earlier judgment in order that the order clearly forces the city to achieve a result that puts an end to any flow of water on the surface of the property of the appellant and that this obligation not be subject to any condition."
It also refers to the creek as a "ditch" and argues that Judge Corriveau erred in agreeing with an expert report by the environment department that it is a river. Since the creek is fed by a storm sewer, the city can simply cut off the flow of water and should be ordered to do so whatever the environment department decides, the appeal argues.
Daniel Green, co-president of the Société pour vaincre la pollution (SVP), said that if the environment department authorizes the city to bury the river, it would set a precedent that could result in the elimination of all the other remaining creeks on the island of Montreal, since most are also contaminated to varying degrees.
"That would be a loss of biodiversity," he said. "These creeks have fish. Ducks populate them. In some instances, beavers populate them."
Simply diverting the contamination underground, rather than fixing the problem by repairing the cross-connected sewer pipes, is a poor solution, Green said.
The lost rivers of Montreal.
The St-Pierre River once rambled through present-day Snowdon, Côte-St-Luc, Ville St-Pierre and St-Henri,( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/from-the-archives-our-islands-lost-rivers ) where it fed a lake on the site of the Turcot Yards and continued on to Pointe à Callière, while another branch headed to Verdun and LaSalle. Samuel de Champlain described the river, then teeming with fish, when he explored Montreal in 1611.
Cross-connected sewer pipes have caused contamination in past years in Kirkland( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/kirkland-citizens-association-launches-online-petition-over-crossed-sewer-pipes ), Pierrefonds-Roxboro( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/pierrefonds-tackles-133-cases-of-cross-connected-pipes ) and Nuns' Island.
In September, Quebec Superior Court Judge rejected a $44-million lawsuit by Groupe Pacific( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/meadowbrook-developer-suing-city-for-46-million ) against Montreal over a proposed housing development on the Lachine side of the Meadowbrook Golf Course that failed to materialize.
Groupe Pacific was demanding $28.5 million for the value of the land, and another $15 million for lost potential profits.
Meadowbrook Groupe Pacific, a subsidiary of Groupe Pacific, bought the land in 2006 for $3 million, and later presented a plan to build a 1,600-unit residential complex named Petite Rivière.
In 2015, the city of Montreal designated its portion of the Meadowbrook site as "large green space or recreational,"( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/city-of-montreal-gives-meadowbrook-golf-course-a-green-designation ) marking a victory for conservationists who had battled for a quarter-century to protect the land from development.
The designation under the Montreal urban agglomeration's land use and development plan provides guidelines for future development.
Côte-St-Luc changed the zoning on its portion of the site to recreational in 2000.
Montreal West Mayor Beny Masella declined to comment on the ruling.
Côte St-Luc city councillor Dida Berku said: "We are studying the judgment and exploring our options."
"As we have just received the judgment, our legal department is currently analyzing it," said Youssef Amane, a spokesperson for Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
Related
From the archives: Our island's lost rivers( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/from-the-archives-our-islands-lost-rivers )
CREDIT: Marian Scott, Montreal Gazette

