Customers at Laird and Son, a Toronto-based air conditioning company, are no longer that concerned about the efficiency of the units they are buying.
Customers at Laird and Son, a Toronto-based air conditioning company, are no longer that concerned about the efficiency of the units they are buying.
"Instead, their first question is not about efficiency, it's, 'When can you do it?'" Frank Williams, a partner at Laird and Son, said Tuesday.
With record high temperatures in Southern Ontario, he said, the company's sales have doubled and he has been forced to increase his staff to accommodate the demand.
Normally, Laird and Son would install anywhere between 60 and 70 air-conditioning units in June. This year, that number has doubled, he said.
The heat wave is not isolated to Ontario. It has spread into Quebec and across the Maritime provinces, according to Environment Canada.
June, 2005, is about to become the hottest on record in Southern Ontario and Quebec, and July promises to be even warmer, according Dave Phillips, a senior climatologist with Environment Canada.
"Toronto keeps clobbering records," Mr. Phillips said, adding that 14 days in the city have been equivalent to 35 degrees with the humiddex taken into account. The previous record was nine days in 1959.
"Last year, the whole year, we had 13 days (with a humidex above 35)," Mr. Phillips said.
But the temperature even without the humidex is blistering.
Both Montreal and Toronto have recorded records, with the monthly average in Toronto 4.3 degrees higher than normal and in Montreal 3.1 degrees warmer.
"By the time we close the book on June records, we'll probably have 14 days where the temperature has been above 30 C (in Toronto)," Mr. Phillips said. So far, Toronto has recorded 12 days above 30 C and Montreal has recorded nine.
"Last year people were complaining about 'Where is summer?' This year they're complaining about there is too much summer."
For then next 10 days, Environment Canada is calling for warmer-than-normal temperatures from Thunder Bay to Newfoundland
"We're calling for warmer than normal across Canada and, for the period July, August, September - apart from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick - we're saying its going to be warmer than normal," Mr. Phillips said.
The heat has created unprecedented electricity demands in Ontario.
Monday set a record, with Ontario's air-conditioners driving electricity demand to 26,157 megawatts per hour at the peak, said Terry Young, spokesman at the Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). Last June, demand peaked at 23,163 megawatts.
"It's all about air conditioning," Mr. Young said, adding that the generating capacity in Ontario is 25,500 megawatts. Anything above that requires the province to import more-expensive electricity from the United States.
By midday Tuesday, Ontario's electrical demand was once again poised to set records. IESO reported demand at 24,896 megawatts.
IESO is encouraging people to reduce their electricity use, primarily by curbing the use of air conditioners between peak hours - 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Otherwise, Hydro One may be forced to reduce demand by causing short blackouts in areas of high demand.
This is what happened in the Ottawa area on Monday, Hydro One spokesman Peter Gregg said, when the extreme heat and high-electrical demand forced the utility to shut off power in the area briefly.
The combination of heavy demand and intense heat caused what Mr. Gregg calls a "thermal constraint" on a transformer station south of Ottawa.
Essentially what happened was that, with temperatures peaking at more than 30 C, it became impossible for the high volume of electricity needed to pass through the station. Hydro One was forced to shut of the electricity in several areas for 15-minute intervals to decrease demand through the station.
Toronto coroner Jim Edwards said he is reviewing one heat-related death and is investigating what may be another.
People with respiratory problems are more vulnerable to heat-related illness, he said.
The city of Toronto declared its sixth heat alert of the year Tuesday. Such alerts are declared when there is an increased chance of weather-related death.
The alerts spur into action the Heat-Alert Response Team, which deals specifically with people who are suffering in the heat.
The team, made up of four paramedics who tour the city prepared to deal with life-threatening emergencies, visits homes and provide heat counselling.
Equipped with a hygrometer - an instrument the size of a large calculator that can measure both indoor temperature and humidity - paramedic Heather Cairns can advise patients which room in their house is the coolest.
About 50 per cent of the team's calls result in someone's being taken to the hospital, Ms. Cairns said.
Often people call for help late in the day when they are no longer able to deal with the heat. Ms. Cairns remembers tending to an apartment that was 30.3 inside, but felt like 41 with the humidex factored in, she said.
The disabled, elderly woman who lived there said she did not feel sick enough to go to the hospital but was eventually sent when she revealed she had trouble breathing and chest pains, Ms. Cairns said.
Education is key to managing safely in the heat, Ms. Cairns said.
Fans are important for cooling down, but they should be used only when a window is open. Without an outside air source, fans will have a convection effect, pushing low-lying cool air up, where it heats up.
"It's like a convection oven. ... It actually becomes hotter with the windows closed than if you weren't using a fan at all," she said.
During a heat alert, the Red Cross operates a heat information line from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. By dialling 416-480-2615, people can call in if they are concerned about their well-being or that of someone in the city. Where necessary, the Red Cross will then ask the medical team to make a courtesy call.
Southern Ontario has received only about one-third of its normal precipitation for May and June, Mr. Phillips said.
"There's no wonder there are watering bans, the ground is looking parched, gardeners are frustrated and the farmers are wishing for more precipitation. The berries aren't plump like you'd expect for this time of year."
And with no rain to cleanse the air, the smog days are set to increase, "the sun is just cooking those chemicals coming out of our tail pipes and our smoke stacks and so we're seeing a lot of bad air days."

