A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Montreal wants power to decide where cannabis use can be banned( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-wants-power-to-decide-where-cannabis-use-can-be-banned )
Montreal wants pot-smoking banned in public spaces where tobacco use is already forbidden - near playgrounds, for example.
And it also wants Quebec to give it the power to ban cannabis consumption temporarily in other places during special events, Mayor Valérie Plante told the Montreal Gazette on Thursday.
Under rules that came into effect in May 2016, smoking is prohibited in outdoor play areas aimed at children and on sports fields.
"We want to follow the same rules and bylaws as the ones connected to tobacco use in public spaces," said Plante, who next week will present the city's suggestions to a National Assembly committee studying Quebec's proposed pot legalization bill.
She said that would be a coherent way to proceed and would make pot rules easier to apply.
"We're also asking to have some flexibility for specific events or period of times."
She cited the Fête des Neiges festival in Parc Jean-Drapeau as an example.
"For four days, there are families, there are kids - we want to be able to say, OK, for this period of time in that area, there's no smoking whatsoever."
Montreal weather: Beware of things falling from the sky, including rain( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-beware-of-things-falling-from-the-sky-including-rain )
Look up.
With freezing rain changing to rain, and milder temperatures forecast until a return to the deep freeze this weekend, snow accumulation on roofs, awnings and car shelters could become a problem.
The Régie du Bâtiment du Québec is warning property owners to pay special attention to snow that may have accumulated on the roofs. The rain could make that snow even heavier and risk caving in a roof, the authority said.
If a lot of snow has accumulated, it's a good idea to remove it, but the RBQ recommends hiring a professional to do the work.
Also, with all the snow piled on the roofs of high buildings, there could be large chunks falling to the ground as the temperature warms up.
All the rain could make the roads and sidewalks icy late Friday when temperatures are expected to plummet to -10 C and the rain will change to snow.
Environment Canada issued a special weather statement on Thursday warning that there could be significant snowfall for southern, central and eastern Quebec, and the snow could be mixed with ice pellets or freezing rain over the southernmost areas.
The bone-chilling cold will return this weekend, with a high of -10 C forecast for Saturday, and highs of -18 C expected for Sunday and Monday.
Snow clearing not completed
It looks like the city might not finish clearing Monday's snow before the next dump. About 71 per cent of the streets had been cleared by 6 p.m.
It has been a bad week for Montreal-area commuter trains( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/its-been-a-bad-week-for-montreal-area-commuter-trains )
Several unrelated incidents wreaked havoc with the commuter train lines on the first four days of the week.
"It was a difficult week," said Elaine Arsenault, a spokesperson for the Réseau transport métropolitain, which oversees operations of the region's commuter trains.
The problems began on Monday morning when water from melting snow seeped into what Arsenault called propulsion boxes on four train cars serving the Deux-Montagnes line. As a result, several trains had to run with just eight out of 10 cars, seriously reducing capacity on the line.
She said that, in anticipation of the next major thaw, maintenance workers are checking to ensure propulsion systems are properly sealed.
The Deux-Montagnes line also saw electrical problems that affected several other cars on Thursday morning. Two cars could not connect to power and, without heat and the ability to open doors, they were taken out of service.
Electrical problems were also to blame for the cancellation of Train 932 toward Central Station at 9 a.m. Thursday. Arsenault said the train had no electrical current, so its engine could not start.
"It has been taken in for repairs, and cancelled. It will be put back into service later," she said.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

