In the wake of an apartment complex fire t( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/after-fire-reveals-unregistered-rooming-house-cdn-ndg-mayor-vows-action-against-slumlord )hat uncovered numerous prohibited rooming houses, the borough of Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce is trying to ensure the residents don't lose their homes.
"The people that were living there, at least they had a place to stay," borough manager Stéphane Plante said Thursday. "If we go there in a couple days and say 'Too bad, we're closing the place,' we will end up with people in the street. Obviously, that is not what we want to do."
The owner of the building is facing tens of thousands of dollars in fines after inspections of his properties Wednesday and Thursday showed the presence of cockroaches, mice and mould and more prohibited rooming houses.
Twenty-one residents fled their apartments Sunday after a fire broke out in a Linton Ave. building in Côte-des-Neiges. No one was injured, but authorities discovered separate rooms in five out of six apartments were being rented out to individuals paying $400 to $500 a month. As many as four people were renting rooms in each apartment.
The apartments, typically composed of five rooms and a bathroom, normally rent out for $700 to $950 a month. Some long-term tenants pay as little as $620 a month. Under borough regulations, the person who holds the lease can rent a maximum of three rooms in their apartment as long as he or she is also living there. In the burned-out Linton Ave. building, one individual was renting five apartments, then renting rooms in each unit to as many as four people. In some cases, doors had been added to entrances of living rooms to convert them into a separate bedroom (although they hadn't been subdivided with a wall down the middle, as had previously been reported, borough officials said).
The arrangement falls under what the borough classifies as a rooming house, which requires special permits, said borough urban planner Lucie Bédard.
Building owner Habibur Rahman says he rents out 250 apartments and owns more than 10 apartment buildings in the city, including five in a row on Linton Ave. between Côte-des-Neiges Rd. and Legaré St. that hold 24 units each. He said the Régie du logement allows the person who has signed a lease to rent out rooms, (the Régie confirmed this information to the Montreal Gazette). Rahman said he was not aware municipal laws banned the practice without a rooming house permit.
After paying bills for electricity, internet and cleaning services, the individual who was renting out the rooms - identified by the owner only by his first name, Sayed - was only earning $200 to $300 a month on each apartment, and even less if he couldn't find renters, Rahman said.
The building owner said he was aware his tenant was renting to others, and said he did not earn any extra money from the arrangement.
"No, I wasn't getting extra. This is Canada, you cannot get anything extra. Everything has to be in the book. He pays me nothing," Rahman said.
"I rent to a person. He can rent to the other people. The tenants' board (Régie du logement) allows it, and I can't do anything."
The arrangement worked well because it ensured he received his rent on time and saved him from dealing with tenants who don't pay their rent, he said.
Rahman has the option of applying for a permit to run a rooming house, which would require expensive alterations like putting a sink in each room, borough manager Plante said. He could convert the apartment back to its original state and rent to a single person, but that would mean putting the current tenants out on the street. Or he could allow the tenants to co-sign on the lease and share the rent, lowering their current monthly payments.
"That would be the best option," Plante said.
Borough inspectors investigated the buildings on Linton Ave. owned by Rahman starting Wednesday morning, borough mayor Sue Montgomery said. They turned up numerous cases of mould, mice and cockroach infestations, and things like missing faucets and evidence of other apartments rented by the room. Fines for the infractions vary from $650 to $6,000 each. Rahman has 30 days to make the repairs.
Tenants rights organization L'Oeil said Rahman has been the subject of several complaints from tenants over the years for unsanitary living conditions and abusive treatment. Problems persist, l'Oeil director Annie Lapalme said, because boroughs lack the budgets for inspectors and the courage to fine lawbreakers.
Tenants in buildings on Linton Ave. owned by Rahman told the Montreal Gazette the owners were quick to ask for rent, but slow to respond to complaints about issues like flood-destroyed ceilings, cockroaches and faulty toilets. One man who has lived in a Linton Ave. building for more than 20 years said his building was clean and well-run until Rahman purchased it three years ago. He said Rahman has been slow on repairs and cleaning and tried to push out long-term tenants paying lower rents like himself in order to rent out the apartments by the room. Several of Rahman's buildings have apartments where people rent by the room, he said.
"It's a nightmare for many people," said the tenant, who did not want to give his name for fear of repercussions.
Rahman responded that he has never received any official complaints or fines from the city.
"People can complain, but if they're complaining, why hasn't the city given me any notice or letter or anything? I have had no fines or punishments from the city," he said.
Borough manager Plante said Rahman received notices of numerous infractions in 2016 in his Linton Ave. apartments. He repaired them quickly before receiving fines.
Montgomery noted that the fact many of the issues resurfaced in this week's inspections indicate the previous repairs were not well done.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( http://twitter.com/renebruemmer )
Related
C.D.N.-N.D.G. mayor puts 'slumlord' on notice after rooming-house fire( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-5eka )
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette