After a brutal cold spell( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/baby-its-cold-outside ) that lasted almost two weeks, Mother Nature is offering up something a bit more appealing this week.
A low-pressure system and a warm front from Hudson Bay is expected to bring rain showers on Thursday with a forecast high of between 5 and 10 C. The record for Jan. 11, registered in both 1975 and 1980, is 9.4 C, according to Jean-Philippe Bégin, a meteorologist with Environment Canada.
Montreal could see freezing rain or mixed precipitation on Wednesday before temperatures climb on Thursday, Bégin said.
The mild weather will probably not lead to flooding because the thaw and the rain will not last long, Bégin predicted. The snow on the ground will also absorb some of the rain, he said. Temperatures will fall throughout the day on Friday with colder weather returning for the weekend. Environment Canada is forecasting a high of minus-11 C on Saturday and Sunday.
Omar Albane cleans stairs outside Place Ville-Marie during afternoon snow fall on the city of Montreal on Monday January 8, 2018.
Snow clearing begins
On Monday night, the city of Montreal began clearing away the snow that has fallen during the last week. About 10 centimetres of snow fell through the day on Monday with another two to four centimetres expected Monday night.
The city received several small accumulations of snow since the last clearing operation was completed on New Year's Eve. A total of 18.4 centimetres had fallen as of Sunday.
"We need the cooperation of citizens and want people to respect the No Parking signs," said Jean-François Parenteau, the executive committee member in charge of snow removal.
Parenteau said he hopes the snow-removal operation will be finished by Thursday night.
During the weekend, several boroughs had lots of snow on the streets, and while sidewalk plows were out, many streets remained snow-covered. The centralized snow-clearing policy means the city decides when plowing and removal operations take place.
You can keep track of the city's snow-removal operation on itsInfo-Neige website( https://infoneige.ca/ ) (infoneige.ca) or on its mobile application.
An RTM commuter train sits in the Lucien-L'Allier station in Montreal on Monday January 8, 2018. Early in the day delays had been reported due to snow clogged switching stations on the tracks.
Trains delayed
The snowfall caused long delays for evening train commuters. The Réseau de transport métropolitain announced delays of up to 30 minutes for departures on all six commuter train lines, including three cancellations on the Candiac line because the window wipers weren't working.
Strong winds continually pushed snow onto the tracks and ice formed on several switches, resulting in delays, said Elaine Arsenault, a spokesperson for the RTM.
Pierre Roussin, who takes the train to Laval each evening, was thankful that his 6:45 p.m. train was not delayed. He said heavy snow often causes havoc with switches during the winter so he takes delays in his stride. "They don't happen that often," he said.
Arsenault said she wasn't expected delays to commuter train services on Tuesday morning.
A motorist digs out his car as another waits for an STM bus to pass on Joesph St. in Verdun on Monday evening. STM buses are forced to work their way around snow clogged city streets and cars that did not shovel a space before parking causing some streets to become almost one lane.
Dozens of crashes
A woman in her 70s died Monday evening after the car she was travelling in flipped over on Highway 10 in Marieville, in the Montérégie.
About 40 cars went off the road during the snowfall on Monday, said Claude Denis, a spokesperson for the Sûreté du Québec.
Police in Laval said the slippery conditions resulted in several motorists ending up in the ditch during the commute home Monday night.
CREDIT: Katherine Wilton, Montreal Gazette

