QUEBEC - After Premier Philippe Couillard blasted Ottawa on the issue of asylum seekers Wednesday morning, the tone of the debate became much more conciliatory at night.
Federal Transport Minister Marc Garneau, Immigration Minister Ahmed Hussen and Quebec Immigration Minister David Heurtel arrived together in Ottawa for a meeting of the working group formed in August to deal with the refugee crisis.
"The federal government recognizes that Quebec has had a lot on its shoulders in the last nine months with the majority of irregular migrants who have come to the province," Garneau said.
"Already, we feel the tone is changing and there is a real willingness to work with Quebec to find concrete solutions and this is the purpose of the meeting today," Heurtel added.
Neither would indicate whether the softened tone meant extra federal money would be heading to the province.
Quebec is demanding $146 million for the care of asylum seekers who entered the country illegally at the Canada-U.S. border near the St-Bernard-de-Lacolle post.
Earlier in the day, Couillard insisted front-line services are at a breaking point and turned up the heat by demanding Ottawa help manage asylum seekers landing here.
Couillard reminded the Trudeau government that managing borders is essentially a federal responsibility and centres harbouring asylum seekers will soon be filled to capacity, which is Ottawa's problem, not Quebec's.
"The question was: What are you going to do when the limit is reached?" Couillard told reporters. "It's not for me to answer. Asylum seekers are totally a federal jurisdiction. The answer should be coming from them.
"People in Ottawa need to realize our system is stretched and cannot be stretched any more. We can't have this (influx) year after year, after year. The system is going to bust. That's real life, that's the reality."
Couillard, who was flanked by Heurtel, was referring to Ottawa's response to Quebec's request for more aid and more screening of asylum seekers crossing the border from New York at Roxham Rd. near Hemmingford.
Over the last few weeks, the numbers have dramatically increased, with Quebec announcing the province's 1,850 spots for asylum seekers in four locations are rapidly filling up.
More than 70 per cent of spots are filled; once that hits 85 per cent, Quebec says it will no longer place anyone crossing the border illegally.
But in a letter to Heurtel, Hussen instead deplores the fact Quebec has only four temporary shelters up and running, while last summer it had opened 13, including making use of hotels, the former Royal Victoria Hospital and the Olympic Stadium.
Hussen said the situation risks causing delays at the border and an "unacceptable humanitarian situation."
The letter, Couillard said, shows Ottawa is completely disconnected with what's happening in Quebec.
"It's time the federal government came to Quebec and looked after this," Couillard told reporters. "We are extremely dissatisfied, this response is not acceptable.
"It shows a complete lack of understanding of what is happening in the field and what Quebec experienced last year( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/increase-in-asylum-seekers-at-border-in-december-as-2017-sets-record-for-claims ).
"Quebec played a humanitarian role last year and is ready to do it again, but within its capacity to do so. My message to Ottawa is to say it's time to start working. You (Ottawa) have to play your role right now.
"The issue of asylum seekers is strictly federal. Let the federal government come here and look after it."
RCMP officers help a group of asylum seekers who had crossed into Canada illegally at Roxham Rd., near Hemmingford Feb. 20, 2017.
Just a few hours before he headed to Ottawa for the talks on the crisis, Heurtel repeated Ottawa has failed to realize the number of asylum seekers this year has already tripled to 6,074 from about 2,000 during the same period in 2017.
Up to 400 crossings a day expected
The situation is completely different from last year when Quebec responded to what was a temporary wave of Haitian asylum seekers fleeing( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/influx-of-haitian-refugees-taxes-quebec-shelters-immigration-minister-says ) the United States after U.S. president Donald Trump said they were no longer welcome, he said.
Today's asylum seekers are coming from all over, including Nigeria and Asia. It is estimated 40 per cent don't want to stay in Quebec.
Heurtel said projections suggest there will be up to 400 crossings a day this summer, compared with 250 in 2017.
"What we are seeing is a new phenomenon and we have to react differently," said Heurtel noting none of the shelters used in 2017 were designed as long term housing for asylum seekers.
He repeated Ottawa needs to get more involved and ensure and better distribution of the new arrivals across the county because Quebec has hit its limit( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/weve-reached-our-limit-to-house-undocumented-asylum-seekers-quebec-says ).
He said the issue isn't necessarily one of money but of real practical problems of capacity.
As an example, since the wave started last year Quebec has received about 2,500 children and they all needed access to the education system( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-schools-preparing-for-hundreds-of-asylum-seekers ). That is the equivalent of five new elementary schools in Montreal.
Hussen, however, has responded saying Quebec already got $490.2 million - $112 million more than last year - to offer services to immigrants.
Quebec maintains its request is for additional funds to cover $146 million in unprecedented expenses from last year's influx.
Quebec's opposition parties, however, have stepped up the pressure on the Couillard government to act with Coalition Avenir Québec Leader François Legault highlighting the fact Ottawa has not yet received a detailed invoice from Quebec for the $146 million.
Over the last few days, Legault has called on the government to put a lid on the number of asylum seekers it accepts. Since Quebec's population is roughly 23 per cent of Canada's population, the number it accepts should be 23 per cent of the total, he says.
In 2017, Quebec received 50 per cent of the asylum seekers who had come to Canada, apparently because Roxham Road has taken on an international reputation as an easy way in.
The CAQ, which is also on the record as wanting fewer legal immigrants, does not spell out how the people are to be distributed in the rest of Canada but notes many were bused to Cornwall last year.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauuthier@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/philipauthier( http://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Presse Canadienne contributed to this report.
Related
Editorial: Decisions on asylum seekers should be expedited( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/editorials/editorial-decisions-on-asylum-seekers-should-be-expedited )
Opinion: Here's what Canada should do about 'irregular' asylum seekers( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/opinion-heres-what-canada-should-do-about-irregular-asylum-seekers )
Celine Cooper: Let's act to regularize flow of asylum seekers( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/celine-cooper-lets-act-to-regularize-flow-of-asylum-seekers )
CREDIT: Philip Authier, Montreal Gazette



