QUEBEC - The Couillard government accused the opposition Coalition Avenir Québec of misleading Quebecers by claiming less than 10 per cent of damage claims from last year's spring floods have been compensated by the government.
Public Security Minister Martin Coiteux said there can be all kinds of reasons the files are not closed, like there is still work to be done or people have delayed making a decision about whether they want to rebuild.
In other cases, victims opted to do work in the spring rather than winter, so their files are not closed. In still others, the victims are challenging their settlements.
But Coiteux said it's dead wrong to say - as the CAQ did in a press release - that the victims have been abandoned by the Liberal government.
To date, all flood victims have received some level of compensation, Coiteux told reporters. Quebec has, in fact, handed over a total of $118 million to 6,000 people, and the account is still open.
"The CAQ is presenting numbers in a completely meaningless fashion," Coiteux said. "It is totally untrue to say people have not received money."
Armed with numbers provided by access to information requests, the CAQ MNA for Mirabel, Sylvie D'Amours, held a news conference on Tuesday to say that as of Jan. 18, only 89 of the 1,026 claims filed by victims in the Montreal region in the wake of floods in April and May of last year had actually been closed.
The situation is similar across the province, the CAQ said. Of the total 6,036 files opened, only 452 (7.5 per cent) have been settled.
Joining her for the news conference, CAQ leader François Legault ripped into the government.
"It makes no sense," Legault said. "These files are jammed up in the Liberal bureaucracy. It's time (Premier) Philippe Couillard personally handled these flood victim files.
"You know Mr. Couillard went there (to the site of floods) with his big boots and said, 'Hey, I'm taking charge of this personally.'
"Its about time he gets involved. There people have suffered a lot of stress. In many cases they lost their homes and are still living in hotels."
But when D'Amours raised the issue later in the legislature and asked why nine months after the flood 100 families are still living in hotels, Coiteux fought back with zeal.
"With respect, I think she does not understand the situation of these victims," Coiteux said. "Does she want to them to go back and live in unsanitary houses where the cleanup work has not been done?
"This is out of the question. I even issued directives to keep some in hotels longer than the regulation allows as a humanitarian gesture.
"Is she saying we should close these files and not give any more financial compensation?"
But D'Amours said the CAQ is not done with the issue and noted in the case of other floods in recent years victims have waited as long as two years to get compensation.
Related
Tap here for complete coverage of the spring flooding( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood )
CREDIT: Philip Authier, Montreal Gazette

