A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Police search for man who escaped from psychiatric hospital( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/police-search-for-man-who-escaped-from-psychiatric-hospital )
Police are searching for an escapee from a psychiatric hospital who was charged with a 2011 Pointe-Claire murder but found not criminally responsible.
Sean Brennan, 29, left the Philippe-Pinel Institute at 1:15 p.m. on Jan. 22, the Sûreté du Québec said in a statement Tuesday afternoon. Philippe-Pinel is on Henri-Bourassa Blvd. E. in the Rivière-des-Prairies-Pointe-aux-Trembles borough.
In 2011, Brennan, then 22 years old, was charged with second-degree murder in the death of Bryan Bougie, 41. Bougie died in a third-floor apartment of a 34-unit building on Pardo Ave. Bougie was stabbed 91 times.
A day before the attack, Bougie had come across Brennan sleeping in a stairwell of his apartment building. He did not know Brennan, but offered to let him stay in his apartment.
At the time, Brennan was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia, not taking medication and was drinking alcohol and consuming drugs daily, according to a news report about the trial.
Check your tickets: Loto-Québec seeking winners of unclaimed prizes( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/check-your-tickets-loto-quebec-seeking-winners-of-unclaimed-prizes )
Quebec's public lottery corporation is looking for one unknowing, or perhaps forgetful, millionaire.
Loto-Québec issued a news release Tuesday saying no one has come forth with the winning lottery ticket worth $1.75 million that was sold on Dec. 6 in the Montreal region. The ticket had the winning numbers of 6, 9, 16, 19, 21, 28 and a bonus number of 35. The winner has until Dec. 8, 2018 to claim the prize.
The corporation is also appealing to the winners of several other large prizes, one of which was worth more than $500,000.
At least 25 pedestrians fall victim to icy sidewalks: Urgences Santé( http://wp.me/p4Uzqt-5001 )
Montreal woke up Tuesday to a city covered in a coat of ice and a weather forecast that includes a freezing rain warning and calls for more of the same over the course of the day.
As of Tuesday afternoon, Urgences Santé had responded to about 25 calls in Montreal and Laval after pedestrians had fallen on icy sidewalks.
In some cases, people were transported to a hospital for fractures, said spokesperson Valérie Tremblay.
Tremblay asked the public to make sure their stairs are clear of ice because Urgences Santé employees who are responding to emergencies have had to remove ice from the stairs before entering homes.
She also suggested that people take the time to remove ice from the stairs of elderly neighbours to help prevent falls.
CREDIT: François Lauzon, Montreal Gazette

