Summertime, and the livin' is easy. Yet in our information-overload society, there's always something to make you queasy.
Too many of us are suffering from new summertime afflictions, like:
Weather Worry: After complaining incessantly about our cold, rainy spring, many Montrealers have been complaining about the heat.
Montreal had 11 July days of over 30 degrees, but pretty much every other day had a "feels like 35 degrees" alert on the weather forecast.
The better the weather gets, the more terrifying we make it sound.
Weather channels and websites now issue daily SEVERE THUNDERSTORM watches, EXTREME HEAT! alerts, humidex warnings, lightning warnings, flood advisories, heavy rainfall warnings and smog alerts that quietly scream: "Stay indoors everyone!"
It won't be long before they have a Dangerous Falling Leaf Alert.
Every hour of the hourly weather Fear Forecast now threatens at least some rain, though it's usually less than 0.5 millimetres, or even 0.1 mm - barely enough to wash your face.
I took a daylong bike trip with friends last Wednesday when the forecast threatened "severe thunderstorms" and 70 per cent chance of rain almost every hour - but we never even got wet.
At night, I went to the Rogers Cup despite a "severe rain warning" and watched a gorgeous rain-free night of tennis. If any of you stayed home that day because of the forecast, you were a victim of this new weather prediction terrorism.
It's an epidemic of fake weather news, as forecasting sites compete to frighten us into clicking on them every 15 minutes instead of stepping outdoors.
It's also creating an obsessive new generation of "satellite radar" addicts, mostly male, who spend more time staring at clouds on their phone apps than at actual clouds in the sky.
"Uh-oh honey, look-it this extreme cumulonimbus thundercloud formation simulation coming in from The Caribbean in 7.87 hours! I can see it's definitely on a trajectory to hit N.D.G.
"Better head for the cellar with the kids till it blows over."
My own advisory? Ignore the weather forecast. Much like 60 years ago in the days of CBC's Percy Saltzman, it's wrong as often as it's right - and you'll miss some beautiful days by worrying about a few bad ones.
It's fake weather news, folks!
Bite fright: I spent last week in the Eastern Townships and made a grim discovery. The fierce, carnivorous Laurentian mosquito has blundered out of its usual habitat and discovered The Townships, once a bug-free oasis.
By 5 p.m. everyone around was slapping or scratching themselves silly, or spraying on Deep Woods Smells Awful OFF!
West end Montreal parks also have more mosquitos, so tennis players have to whack themselves before whacking the ball. It's another symptom of climate change as bug life migrates North seeking fresh meat - us.
You can't even ignore your bites like the old days, since bug life is morphing. There are 3,000 species of mosquito in the world and too many are heading our way.
West Nile-carrying mosquitos are still rare here, but West Nile paranoia has arrived, as people study their bite patterns like entomologists, saying:
"Omigod! What is that and why isn't it going away? Quick - someone call Medevac!"
Adding to the paranoia is understandable fear of another airborne threat: Lyme disease carried by ticks. These, too, have migrated north and are terrorizing the Townships, where doctors are treating many more patients.
If a tick bite doesn't heal in a day, physicians advise antibiotics - so maybe it's wise to be paranoid.
As fear mounts it won't be long before hourly bug forecasts become common: "Extreme deer tick warning and Asian tiger mosquito sighting. Stay indoors everyone!"
Air-con contradictions: More Montrealers are getting AC because of rising temperatures, like people everywhere.
Stoic Europeans always scorned American air-conditioning, but this summer's blistering heat wave has ignited a cooling craze across Europe.
The trouble is, the more people get air-conditioning, the more the world heats and the more A/C we need - as cooling ourselves helps warm the planet.
But relief might be coming. Sony says it has invented an ecological, portable "mini-air conditioner" to wear on your body that cools you more than the space around.
Due out in Japan next year, it slips into a special pocket behind your neck and purportedly cools you down by 13 degrees Celsius.
This could also solve one of the biggest summer marital spats on Earth - couple air-con wars( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/the-great-ac-debate-when-some-like-it-hot-but-others-not-so-much ).
In the future, maybe you'll wear an individual climate control device in the same bed as your spouse - only you'll be living at a chilly 18 while she basks at 31.
There will be no more "honey turn down the air-conditioning - there's ice forming on my cuticles." Just you happily surrounded by a thin layer of personal Arctic air, while she bakes in her own private Sahara.
With luck you can save your marriage and the planet at the same time.
Until then, maybe you should just - Stay Indoors Until Winter! Then you can start complaining all over again.
joshfreed49@gmail.com( mailto:joshfreed49@gmail.com )
Related
Josh Freed: It's mot my fqult I din't knwo h0w to psell( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/josh-freed-its-mot-my-fqult-i-dint-knwo-h0w-to-psell-%e2%95%af%e2%96%a1%e2%95%af%ef%b8%b5-%e2%94%bb%e2%94%81%e2%94%bb )
Josh Freed: Thanks for ruining Mount Royal's most scenic drive, Mayor Plante( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/josh-freed-thanks-for-ruining-mount-royals-most-scenic-drive-mayor-plante )
Read more Josh Freed columns here:( https://montrealgazette.com/?s=josh+freed )

