West Island Community Shares (WICS( http://www.communityshares.ca/ )) had a couple of good reasons to celebrate last Thursday.
The local fundraising organization marked its 20(th) year of operation in the West Island with a record-breaking donation total of $1.345 million dollars.
The funds are distributed to dozens of local community groups, said Leanne Bayer( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/dorvals-leanne-bayer-returns-home-to-lead-west-island-community-shares ), executive director of WICS.
"We had a record-breaking year," she said. "We distribute all that money to the 40 non-profit groups all based in the West Island. So we felt very good; we were very proud about that."
"It's also nice because it's our 20(th) anniversary year. It was April of 1998 when West Island Community Shares was created. So it was quite a celebration on Thursday (at the Auditorium Serge Nolet in Dorval)."
Since its inception in 1998, WICS has raised and distributed more than $13 million to local community groups.
Bayer said donations began coming in a big way last spring when it raised near $100,000 for flood relief.
"About this time last year, we created a special fund called 'Neighbours in Need' and it was for the flood. So we did raise $95,000 early in our fiscal year. But even if you take out the $95,000, it's still about $1.25 million, and that's more than we've ever raised regardless."
Bayer said the flood relief efforts helped raise public awareness about WICS, which relies on both private and corporate donations.
"I think the floods kind of sparked it and gave us some momentum. That also gave us more visibility in the community, which helped us. Maybe some new people learned who we were."
Although the West Island of Montreal is considered to be relatively affluent community, Bayer said one in five West Islanders turns to a community group for assistance every year. The majority (60 per cent) of them are children or youth. They face a myriad of personal challenges, including hunger, cancer, autism, bullying, substance abuse and mental illness.
Bayer said part of the success of WICS is that it is dedicated to serving the West Island community.
Its fundraising motto is: "Live Here, Give Here."
"We think it's catchy," Bayer said." It's to fundraise in the West Island for West Island non-profits."
John Helou, president of Pfizer Canada( https://www.pfizer.ca/ ) and co-chair of the WICS fundraising campaign, said giving back to the community is a core value.
"At Pfizer, we are committed to giving back to the communities where colleagues live and work," he said. "Twenty years ago, we were asked to help in the start-up of West Island Community Shares and they have since then distributed more than $13 million dollars to the West Island."
Russell Williams, a founding member of WICS, speaks at the West Island Community Shares annual cheque distribution event on April 26, 2018.
"Thank you so much to everyone who contributed to this year's campaign," added Nada Nasreddine, the outgoing president of WICS.
About 300 people attend the WICs fundraising gala, including founding WICS member Russell Williams. The former Nelligan MNA was joined by past WICS presidents Pierre Arvisais, Claude Papasian, Vincent Lamoureux and Roger Morin.
jmeagher@postmedia.com( mailto:jmeagher@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: John Meagher, Montreal Gazette

