Highways seem passable - for the time being - while sidewalks, where they can be found, are at best treacherous.
Montreal woke up Tuesday to a city covered in a coat of ice and a weather forecast that includes a freezing rain warning and calls for more of the same over the course of the day. All Montreal area school boards - the English Montreal School Board, Lester B. Pearson School Board, Commission scolaire de Laval, Sir Wilfrid Laurier School Board, Riverside School Board, Commission scolaire Marguerite-Bourgeoys, and Commission scolaire de la Pointe-de-l'Île - closed their schools and offices for today.
The roads were less busy than usual as commuters heeded warnings to restrict travel. School closings throughout much of southern Quebec has also resulted in fewer are cars on the roads, said Sgt. Ingrid Asselin of the Sûreté du Québec.
Some motorists have ended up in the ditch while driving on slippery highways outside Montreal, but there have been no major accidents, she said.
In regions outside Montreal, SQ officers are driving on highways with their lights flashing instructing motorists to slow down.
Gino Andreoli scrapes ice chunks from the roof of his car on 6th Ave. in Montreal Jan. 23, 2018.
While the start of métro service was delayed slightly early Tuesday, all lines were functioning normally as of 7:30 a.m. There were no reports of disruptions to STM bus service, but road and sidewalk conditions virtually guarantee delays over the course of the day and will likely affect handicapped transportation services.
While main thoroughfares in Montreal had been plowed overnight, the ensuing freezing rendered road surfaces treacherous. Side streets were more problematic and many sidewalks were either unplowed over a heavy layer of ice.
Late Tuesday night, Transports Québec reported that road conditions in southwestern Quebec were a mix of snow and ice on Highways 10, 15, 20, 30, 35 and 40. Highways 112, 116 and 132 in the Montérégie were reported as being quite icy.
Montreal area commuter trains serving the Candiac, Deux-Montagnes, St. Jerome and Vaudreuil-Hudon lines were reporting no problems with operations as of 7:30 a.m.
At Trudeau airport, scores of departures( http://www.admtl.com/en/flights/departures ) scheduled for this morning were cancelled or delayed and the outlook was just as grim for arrivals.( http://www.admtl.com/en/flights/arrivals )
Gino Andreoli scrapes ice chunks from the roof of his car on 6th Ave. in Montreal Jan. 23, 2018.
NDP caucus called off
Federal New Democrats have cancelled a three-day caucus meeting that was to be begin Tuesday in Saguenay because of poor weather descending on the region.
Several flights to the area about 200 kilometres north of Quebec City have been cancelled, leaving many NDP MPs unable to get to Saguenay in time for the meetings.
Environment Canada issued a winter storm warning for the Saguenay area Monday night, which said 25 to 40 centimetres of snow and blowing snow were expected over parts of central and eastern Quebec through Wednesday.
A spokeswoman for the NDP said the party would try to hold its caucus later this week in Ottawa.
"Unfortunately, the storm has had an impressive impact on the movement of our MPs in the rest of Canada," said NDP Leader Jagmeet Singh.
"I am extremely disappointed that we have been forced to postpone our visit to Saguenay. I was really looking forward to coming back to the area, especially after being so well received in the fall." he added.
Presse Canadienne and the Canadian Press contributed to this report.
This story will be updated.
Related
Safety first in stormy weather: Tips for winter warriors( http://montrealgazette.com/news/safety-first-in-stormy-weather-tips-for-winter-warriors )
Montreal winter-driving guide: How to avoid sliding, sliding ... bang!( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang )
CREDIT: Hayley Juhl, Montreal Gazette

