The city of Montreal's strategy to remove tonnes of snow dumped during a snowstorm last weekend slithered into the slush Thursday morning, as a a second snowfall, freezing rain and incessant rain showers turned the removal operation into an ongoing attempt to literally keep pedestrians and motorists above water.
And city officials are blaming an unexpected surplus of snow that fell on Wednesday for compelling them to juggle resources between clearing away the slush and broken ice that clogged sewers in many parts of the city and removing snowbanks that were formed last Sunday.
"No one called (on Wednesday) for a 15-centimetre snowfall," said city spokesperson Philippe Sabourin during a press briefing held Thursday afternoon by Mayor Valérie Plante. "We didn't get that information...they were calling for four to seven (centimetres)...That's huge, 15 centimetres of snow, and in addition to that freezing rain (and) then rain. It was a tempest for our (snow removal) crews. It wasn't on the radar for the city of Montreal or the meteorologists."
Plante meanwhile told reporters that the city was in "a race against the clock."
"We know this has been difficult for Montrealers," she said. "Snow removal is continuing, we received 30 centimetres on Sunday, crews started working on Monday at 7 p.m. and we're almost at 60 per cent completion.
"But the rains have slowed down the snow removal operation because we've had to re-allocate resources to make sure roads and sidewalks can be used, and the challenge is that we're in a race against the clock because we know it will get colder. Right now it's mild, but tonight it's going to go down to minus 10 and that water will freeze."
The mayor predicted that the ongoing snow removal operation, originally expected to end by Friday, would only finish sometime next week.
Plante noted that despite a Tweeted message from Sud-Ouest borough mayor Benoit Dorais on Thursday morning that his snow removal crews had been reduced because many were obliged to care for children marooned at home after local school commissions closed down because of the weather, staffing levels elsewhere in the city were at strength.
The mayor said also that a small fleet of ice breaking plows designed to clear sidewalks had begun to be deployed and would probably see more work on Friday as the temperature fell even further.
Earlier on Thursday, Plante had taken to Twitter to tell Montrealers that "All of our teams are at work to ensure the safety (of travellers) but the past few hours have brought a cocktail of weather that is making work difficult..."The priority is to clear sidewalks, spread abrasives and unblock sewers."
Plante added that the city would "evaluate the situation on an hourly basis and adjust our interventions to the changing conditions. We ask that you exercise extreme caution no matter what your mode of travel."
Toutes nos équipes sont à l'ouvre pour assurer la sécurité des déplacements mais les dernières heures ont amené un cocktail météo très varié qui rend les interventions difficiles. Priorité au déblaiement des trottoirs, à l'épandage d'abrasif et au déblocage des puisards. #polmtl( https://twitter.com/hashtag/polmtl?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
- Valérie Plante (@Val_Plante) January 24, 2019( https://twitter.com/Val_Plante/status/1088453344727683072?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw )
The mayor's update came less than 24 hours after city officials said the snow removal operation would be suspended pending expected showers of rain and freezing rain, in order for the snow to absorb the precipitation.
By Thursday morning, however, that plan was clearly sinking, as Montrealers woke up to Day 5 of a nightmarish weather cocktail that saw a sub-zero snowstorm on Sunday( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-61tJ ) followed on Wednesday by a day of snow and freezing rain that turned highways and streets into slush-filled quagmires, and then steady rain beginning early Thursday that turned all of the above into ice-sheeted streets and sidewalks with intersections resembling small ponds.
All Montreal island school boards cancelled classes and operations for Thursday while local road conditions( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/road-conditions ) ranged from dodgy to downright treacherous. Water accumulation was the major challenge for motorists, with vehicles of any size running the risk of hydroplaning if they suddenly hit water patches at high speed.
The intersection of Ste-Catherine and Metcalfe Sts. after a night of rain.
Weather( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/weather )-related accidents were reported on Highways 440 and 15 in Laval, the Ville-Marie Tunnel and Highway 20 in Ste-Julie on the South Shore. Water accumulation was also reported on Highway 20 W. at the exit for 55th Ave. and on Highway 25 N. at Tellier St.
Montreal police( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/montreal-police ) closed the exit at 55th Ave. because of the danger the water represented, and also reported a serious accumulation of water in the Atwater Tunnel. They also recommend that motorists and pedestrians think twice about leaving the house Thursday, at least until conditions on roads and sidewalks improve.
And by mid-morning, local emergency wards and first responders were suggesting that advice ought to be followed.
Urgences Santé reported a 25-per-cent increase in calls overnight, likely the result of the icy weather.
"We had roughly 400 calls since midnight," Urgences Santé supervisor Valérie Tremblay said. "We've had many calls involving people falling on the sidewalks, car accidents, but no major injuries."
Tremblay urged people not to call 911 unless it's a serious emergency, but rather to phone the 811 Info-Santé line.
At the Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, doctors treated three patients for ice-related injuries from 6 p.m. yesterday to 10 a.m. Thursday, including a 28-year-old woman who hurt her ankle, a 64-year-old man who fell on his arm and a 4-year-old child for bruises to the head.
At the McGill University Health Centre, two patients were treated for injuries.
"The Montreal General Hospital is the only one of our emergency departments that has seen such cases today (two of them), but that number is nothing out of the ordinary during the winter months," said Paul Logothetis, a spokesperson for the MUHC.
A city crew clears backed-up water from a bus stop at St-Joseph Blvd. and St-Urbain St. on Jan. 24, 2019.
Surface public transit on Montreal island also suffered from the day's rain. The Société de transport de Montréal warned commuters to expect delays in bus service because of the road conditions, and that its buses may not be able to deploy their ramps allowing wheelchair access because of the accumulation of snow on sidewalks.
The transit authority also reported that because of the road conditions, that at least these bus lines #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm107 ) (Peel St.), #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm94 ) (St-Joseph/Iberville), #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm45 ) (on Papineau between Rosemont and St-Grégoire) and #( https://twitter.com/search?q=%23stm196 ) (55th Ave./St-Laurent) were being rerouted.
A parent and child walk home after learning school was cancelled in Montreal on Thursday.
As of 11 a.m., about three dozen flights out of Trudeau airport( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/montreal-pierre-elliott-trudeau-international-airport ) were listed as delayed or cancelled. Power failures( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/hydro-quebec ) were reported in Montreal (2,715 clients affected), the Laurentians (8,869), Lanaudière (6,835) and Laval (3,737).
A woman salts her walkway on 9th Ave. in Montreal on Thursday.
Thursday's forecast( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-622L ) calls for rain changing to snow this afternoon with a high of 5 C, with the temperature falling to zero later this afternoon.
However, the forecast for Thursday evening doesn't bode well for anyone who has to commute home: Snow will give way to local blowing snow, with a low of -17 C overnight.
A parent walks kids back from school after learning that Montreal schools were closed Thursday morning.
Elsewhere in the province, the situation was equally daunting. Many parts of southern and eastern Quebec - particularly the Mauricie, Quebec City and Bas-St-Laurent regions - were being pelted by freezing rain, while rainfall warnings were issued for Sherbrooke and St-Georges.
This story will be updated.
Helene Beaulieu clears ice from her walkway near Chateaubriand Ave. and St-Zotique St. in Montreal on Thursday.
Related
Watch: Montreal winter-driving guide( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-montreal-winter-driving-guide )
Montreal's roadwork lie: An investigation( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/roadwork-has-been-a-lie )
January 2018: Plante to unveil new plan to deal with icy sidewalks( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/plante-to-unveil-new-plan-to-deal-with-icy-sidewalks )

