A forest fire has forced about 100 people from their homes in a northern Saskatchewan community.
A forest fire has forced about 100 people from their homes in a northern Saskatchewan community.
Residents living near Montreal Lake, about 250 kilometres north of Saskatoon, were forced from their community Monday and are now staying at a college campus in Prince Albert, about 100 kilometres south, Saskatchewan Social Services spokesman Doug Wakabayashi told globeandmail.com Tuesday.
Residents from nearby smaller communities were also told to leave their homes, he said, adding that in total, less than 200 people have been ordered out.
No injuries have been reported. Fire officials are assessing the situation to determine when the residents will be allowed back home, Mr. Wakabayashi said.
The fire started after 1 p.m. Monday afternoon on the north end of Bittern Lake and burned through the forest toward Montreal Lake. The exact cause of the fire is unknown, but it is believed to be "human caused," John Cook, spokesman for Saskatchewan's provincial forest fire centre in Prince Albert, told globeandmail.com Tuesday. "That fire is not yet under control," he said.
Fire crews are are being assisted by six air tankers, three helicopters, six bulldozers, conservation officers and the RCMP, Mr. Cook said.
He said strong winds made the flames spread and change direction several times. Warm temperatures and dry conditions are added factors in the blaze, he added.
Fire crews in the province faced three other fires over the Victoria Day weekend, but the Montreal Lake fire affected the most people, he said.
As of Monday, Saskatchewan had reported 209 fires for the year, down from 242 fires during the same time last year, Mr. Cook said, but added that this year the fire count was still far above the five-year average of 141.
"Last year we had a busy spring," he said.
In Alberta, a forest fire near Fort McMurray died down enough on Tuesday to allow officials to reopen the main highway to the northeastern Alberta city.
Traffic is flowing in both directions, but Angela McGonigal, spokeswoman for the Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo, warned that the the highway could be closed again if the fire flares up.
"Conditions can change so rapidly," Ms. McGonigal told globeandmail.com.
About 350 firefighters, facing high winds and heavy smoke, are battling the blaze, which is still burning and has spread to an area 70,000 hectares in size. The fire is burning about 130 kilometres southeast of Fort McMurray, said Barb Toker, spokeswoman with the Forest Protection Division in Fort McMurray.
"The fire is currently out of control," she told globeandmail.com. "We're dealing with erratic fire conditions."
Crews are using 34 helicopters and two air-tanker units and bulldozers to fight the fire, about 400 kilometres north of Edmonton.
Another fire that destroyed a home and a cabin and forced 70 families to flee is reported still to be burning near Smoky Lake.

