Quebec losing young people to interprovincial migration, report shows( https://montrealgazette.com/business/quebec-losing-young-people-to-interprovincial-migration-report-shows )
Between 1981 and 2017, Quebec lost 229,700 people below the age of 45 to interprovincial migration, according to a new report published by the Montreal Economic Institute.
While the number of people under 45 increased in Quebec between 2010 and 2017, the province is still losing people to interprovincial migration, and Boyer warns that if things don't change, "we're going to face significant social problems later on."
The report comes as employers in Quebec increasingly say they're facing a shortage of workers.
"There is a major problem here. We're not addressing it sufficiently," he said.
Between 1981 and 2010, the number of people under 15 in Quebec decreased by 177,300, a 12.6-per-cent decline, according to Boyer's analysis of Statistics Canada data.
During that period, the number of people under 15 in Ontario increased by 309,000, a 16.2-per-cent increase.
The soccer ball Putin gave Trump has a chip that transmits to phones( https://montrealgazette.com/news/world/the-soccer-ball-that-putin-gave-to-trump-has-a-chip-inside-that-transmits-to-nearby-phones/wcm/d82b5502-5f2c-4284-ae09-9d10f7bfc49c )
Russian President Vladimir Putin's gift of a soccer ball to U.S. President Donald Trump last week set off a chorus of warnings - some of them only half in jest - that the World Cup souvenir could be bugged. Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina even tweeted, "I'd check the soccer ball for listening devices and never allow it in the White House."
It turns out they weren't entirely wrong. Markings on the ball indicate that it contained a chip with a tiny antenna that transmits to nearby phones.
But rather than a spy device, the chip is an advertised feature of the Adidas AG ball. Photographs from the news conference in Helsinki, where Putin handed the ball to Trump, show it bore a logo for a near-field communication tag. During manufacturing, the NFC chip is placed inside the ball under that logo, which resembles the icon for a WiFi signal, according to the Adidas website.
Adidas declined to comment on whether the chip could be a vector of a Russian hack. There is no suggestion that such balls or their chips have any security vulnerabilities. The chip itself can't be modified, according to the product description on the Adidas website. "It is not possible to delete or rewrite the encoded parameters," it says.
While the logo on the ball advertised the presence of the chip, it couldn't be determined from the photos whether the chip might have been removed, replaced with actual spy gear, or, even more remotely, whether the entire ball itself was fabricated for the event and only resembled the Adidas model in question.
"The security screening process that is done for all gifts was done for the soccer ball," White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said in an email. "We are not going to comment further on security procedures." The White House declined to say whether any modifications to the ball had been identified or where the ball would be kept going forward.
Power limitations force MUHC's Glen site to selectively cut off central air( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/power-limitations-force-muhcs-glen-site-to-selectively-cut-off-central-air )
A faulty backup generator at the superhospital of the McGill University Health Centre that plunged the operating rooms into darkness for nearly one hour Monday has prompted authorities to launch an investigation into possible causes.
But apart from potential issues with at least one generator, there are limitations to the power at the MUHC's Glen site in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, the Montreal Gazette has learned. During a heat wave, the Glen site cuts off the air conditioning on purpose in the cafeteria and atrium to keep the clinical areas cool.
During record-breaking temperatures this month, cafeteria workers have resorted to placing wet towels around their necks to cope with the stifling heat. When the superhospital opened in 2015, MUHC officials boasted of the state-of-the-art facilities that included central air conditioning.
Julia Asselstine, assistant director of communications and engagement at the MUHC, explained the rationale behind cutting off the air conditioning in the packed cafeteria used by employees, patients and their families.
"In the event that the chilled water temperature gets too hot inside clinical areas, there is a predetermined sequence of load shedding that is automatically engaged by the building control system," Asselstine said in an emailed statement.
"The cafeteria/atrium ventilation system is among the systems that are temporarily stopped so that the temperatures in the more critical spaces of the Glen can be rapidly lowered."
CREDIT: Jacob Dubé

