As a major storm carrying as much as 40 centimetres of snow closed in on Montreal Tuesday, Quebec's transport minister took to social media to ask motorists to either stay off the roads or be extremely careful if they have to drive.
François Bonnardel wrote on his Twitter account that: "I am following the evolution of the storm that will move into Quebec over the next few hours. If possible, delay any travel and thank you for doing so. If not, adapt your driving (to road conditions)."
That message was echoed by the Sûreté du Québec, the provincial force responsible for patrolling Quebec highways. In a statement posted soon after Bonnardel's tweet, the SQ urged motorists to "reduce their speed, keep their distance from the vehicle in front of them and ensure that their windows, headlights and signal lights are clear."
The SQ said it would deploy patrol cars at "strategic areas" of the local road network during the storm and advised anyone who has to be on the roads over the next 24 hours to consult the Quebec 511 website( http://www.quebec511.info/en/Default.aspx ) to check the condition of the route to their destination. Quebec public security minister Geneviève Guilbault said 100 additional SQ officers would be deployed to oversee security on the province's roads.
Meanwhile, Exo, the provincial agency that oversees Montreal-area commuter rail service advised its clientele to follow the social media accounts( https://exo.quebec/en ) of the rail lines they use to keep up to date with the state of service during the storm, as well as to exercise caution on train platforms that will probably be swept with snow during the storm.
Bonnardel's warning, made at a little before 11 a.m., came as a winter storm warning for the Montreal area( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67#191837342337813415201902110504ww1070cwul ) entered its seventh hour. And even though the first lashes of snow weren't expected to be felt until 6 p.m., the effects of its passage east from Ontario were already being felt locally.
At Trudeau airport, several flights to Toronto and the U.S. Midwest were listed as delayed or cancelled, as were most of Tuesday morning's incoming flights from Toronto.
City of Montreal officials were expected to meet the press Tuesday morning to detail their plan to handle the expected pummelling from the storm system, which is expected to arrive in time for supper on Tuesday and dwell over the area until Wednesday evening, dropping about a centimetre of snow every hour during its stay. The storm will also include high winds that will blow whatever snow does accumulate into potential white-outs on the highways, adding to the urgency of Bonnardel's advice.

