What began as a morning of school cancellations, windshield maintenance and fears for the worst was by midday Monday officially designated as another grey, blustery, rainy day in April.
Six hours after issuing a freezing rain warning for the Montreal area, Environment Canada lifted that warning( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67#1614327341268895851201804140504ww1070cwulEnd ) after it became apparent that the cause of concern had quite literally melted away.
Which isn't to say Monday morning didn't start with a glaze of ice-driven dread as Montrealers woke up to a sheen of ice on sidewalks and side streets. And a better-safe-than-sorry consensus was quickly reached among Montreal-area school boards - including the English Montreal School Board, the Lester B. Pearson Board, the Commission scolaire de Montréal and the Riverside School Board - to shut their doors for the day.
But in the end, major thoroughfares were more slick than slippery, and the weather warning of "anywhere from five to 20 millimetres of freezing precipitation ... expected by this evening over Southern Quebec" seems to have melted away only slightly less quickly than the ice that formed overnight Monday.
There were several reports of traffic accidents early Monday morning linked to the overnight barrage of rain and freezing rain, including a hydroplaning incident involving three cars on Highway 40 near Sources Blvd. However, Urgences Santé otherwise reported no increase in calls due to ice related injuries or accidents.
Meanwhile the ice-related damage to Hydro-Québec's power grid in the Outaouais region saw the number of customers without power swell from nearly 30,000 early Monday morning to more than 42,000 by noon.
Also, the aftershocks of Sunday's storm in Toronto( https://www.thestar.com/news/starweather/2018/04/15/second-wave-of-ice-storm-pummels-gta.html ) were continuing at midday to make themselves making themselves felt at Montreal-Trudeau airport, as many departing flights to that city and to several destinations in the United States were delayed or cancelled.
The forecast for Monday calls for a high of 3 degrees Celsius, with periods of rain accompanied by wind gusts of up to 60 to 70 km./hr. continuing into Monday evening.
Alex clears ice from the windshield of her car on St-Zotique St. April 16, 2018.
CREDIT: James Mennie, Montreal Gazette

