The effects of freezing rain and high winds that swept north shore Montreal on Monday were still making themselves felt Tuesday morning, with more than 230,000 Hydro-Québec( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/hydro-quebec ) clients in Laval, the Laurentians and the Lanaudière regions without electricity and a Montreal-area weather forecast that calls for a mix of freezing rain and snow.
In Deux-Montagnes, one of the hardest-hit areas north of Montreal, people lined up outside a greasy spoon on Oka Rd. to get their first warm meal since the power went out Monday afternoon.
"Normally we're busy like this on a Sunday but Tuesday? This is a first," said Monique Lécuyer, a waitress. "They called me in at the last minute to handle this rush. We've got to turn on a dime and roll up our sleeves, I guess."
The restaurant staff hustled between construction workers, seniors and parents whose smiling children just found out they'd be missing school Tuesday.
"I saw the transformer on my street explode," said Maxime Beaudet, who stood in line outside the restaurant. "It was an explosion of blue and the power went out on our block. It's just my dogs and me at home but we're snuggling and keeping warm."
Fallen branches have caused power outages in Laval, April 9, 2019.
Across the island of Laval, where a thick film of ice covered power lines and branches, police went door to door checking to make sure families were safe Tuesday, particularly in areas hardest hit by the outages: Auteuil, Fabreville and Duvernay. There have been two cases of carbon monoxide poisoning since the ice storm began.
In one, a family of four was hospitalized after using a propane-fuelled barbecue to warm their home. The other involved just one person.
Firefighters reported high levels of carbon monoxide inside both homes. Neither case was life-threatening, according to Urgences Santé.
Families crowded into the Carrefour Laval mall early Tuesday to drink hot coffee and get out of their cold homes. Some children sat with their smartphones plugged into electrical outlets, logging onto social media to catch up on the latest news and gossip.
"It's better than being in class," said one high school student from Chomedey.
Laval Mayor Marc Demers urged residents to check in with their neighbours, particularly older residents and those less able to deal with the outages, to ensure they are all right.
Hydro-Québec officials said Tuesday morning they hope to have power re-established to most clients by the end of the day. The efforts of repair crews were complicated Monday by the damage done to the power grid by fallen trees and fallen wires coated in ice by freezing rain. As of 11:45 a.m. Hydro-Québec listed 232,000 homes and businesses without power in the three regions, more than 85,000 of them in the Lanaudière region, 74,000 in the Laurentians and a little over 72,000 in Laval.
"We recorded 10 to 15 millimetres of freezing rain in some areas along with high winds," said Hydro-Québec spokesperson Louis-Olivier Batty, adding that the weather system that caused the damage cut a swath from the lower Laurentians to north of Montreal. "That corridor saw a lot of trees and branches fall on the (power distribution) network."
The Commission scolaire de Laval, Commission scolaire des Affluents, Commission scolaire Wilfrid Laurier and the Commission scolaire de la Seigneurie-des-Mille-Iles announced on Tuesday that all of their schools were closed for the day.
Laval police said Tuesday morning that while some traffic lights had been affected by the outages no major traffic problems had been reported.
"We have patrol officers watching major intersections (in case traffic lights have failed) and checking to see if there are any fallen hydro wires," said police spokesperson Évelyne Boudreau.
Meanwhile, the city of Laval announced it had opened two community centres for residents without power in need of warming up or a shower. The centres are: the Centre Communautaire Accès at 6500 Arthur Sauveé Blvd. in Laval-Ouest and the ??Centre Communautaire de Lausanne at 455 Lausanne St. in Vimont.
This story will be updated.
Presse Canadienne contributed to this report

