Montreal's transit agency has several written reports showing its diesel-electric hybrid buses will never come close to their original promise of a 30-per-cent savings in fuel.
According to two documents the Société de transport de Montréal provided to the Montreal Gazette through an access-to-information request, the actual savings is between 11 and 15 per cent.
One document showed a chart outlining the fuel consumption of all the buses in the STM's fleet, and showed the Series 7 hybrid buses consumed 47.5 litres to travel 100 kilometres, compared with the most efficient diesel buses that consumed 53.5 L/100 km - an 11.2-per-cent savings. Another chart showed the STM's hybrid buses save 15 per cent annually on fuel compared with its conventional diesel buses.
The agency is now coming under fire for not revealing the doubts about fuel efficiency to board members before they approved the purchase last year of830 new hybrid buses at the cost of nearly $1 billion,( http://www.stm.info/sites/default/files/media/CA/2018/06/ca06_art.03.2_stm-5520_rec.pdf ) to be delivered over five years starting in 2020. By the time the delivery is complete, hybrids will make up about half the city's fleet.
When the STM first presented its hybrid buses to the public in 2016, it vaunted an expected savings of fuel of 30 per cent, on average, and an equivalent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. The agency said the hybrids would save money over the long run, because although they are more expensive to purchase, they yield a significant savings on fuel. Those figures were based on a 2009 study( http://www.sto.ca/ligneverte/_download/depliant_phybride_2_1.pdf ) the STM conducted under the supervision of Transport Canada.
However, the new figures cast doubt on both the promised fuel economy and reduction of harmful emissions by the buses, because when asked, the STM was not able to produce any documents showing that the buses will result in significant savings in greenhouse gases.
Upon hearing the revelations, former STM board member Marvin Rotrand said he feels he was deceived when he voted to approve the major hybrid bus purchase.
"The bus is substantially more expensive to purchase, but we were told it is substantially less expensive to operate and over the 16-year life of the bus, it would come out to almost the same thing, but we would have the advantage of significantly lowering greenhouse gas emissions and providing better customer comfort with air conditioning," said Rotrand, who was kicked off the board by Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante last year( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/stm-shakes-up-its-board-ejects-marvin-rotrand-and-welcomes-peter-trent ). "It now appears that was never the case, which begs the question why the STM pushed the board to purchase so many hybrid buses."
Rotrand said the board was motivated to move quickly with the purchase after Plante was elected because one of her signature campaign promises was to boost the STM's fleet.
"The STM was under a lot of pressure from city hall to quickly come up with a plan, come up with the specs, go to tender and purchase the buses," Rotrand said. "We were told as soon as the new board was constituted after the November (2017) election, (by STM chairperson Philippe Schnobb) that this was our No. 1 priority."
While the STM decided in 2016 that it would only purchase hybrid buses from that point on, Rotrand said the sheer size of the 2018 purchase warranted a proper analysis to assure the best technology was chosen. That analysis was not done, and Rotrand blames city hall for that lack of rigour.
Lionel Perez, the interim leader of the opposition Ensemble Montréal party at city hall, said he's alarmed that the STM's experts appear to have lied to board members in order to ram through the purchase.
"It's very disconcerting that the STM has been hiding this information from the public, from the board and from elected officials," Perez said. "If they fudged the numbers because of that political pressure, then someone has to be accountable."
Perez said the STM should suspend the purchase of hybrid buses until the issue can be better studied to see if other technologies of buses can provide similar environmental benefits at a lower price.
"We need to reassess the business case, and maybe we have to advance our objective to buy electric. We know that the life cycle of a hybrid bus is 16 years. That means we're going to be stuck with these hybrid buses with savings that aren't even there," Perez said.
The STM acknowledges its hybrid buses are not well suited to deal with the wide temperature variations that are typical of Montreal's climate.
Earlier this year, STM director general Luc Tremblay said in a radio interview that the STM's hybrid buses are "allergic to the cold."
In fact, a 2015 report from the STM's engineers state that in the winter, it takes a lot of energy to heat up the electric battery. As a result, the bus's electric battery never kicks in when the outside temperature is minus-10C or lower. The report added that the buses also don't perform well during a heat wave, because when their air conditioning units are running, the buses consume 15 per cent more fuel. In other words, when the buses have their air conditioning running on full power, they can consume more fuel than a conventional diesel bus with no air conditioning unit.
Nigel Clark, a professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering at West Virginia University, who has studied hybrid bus technology, said the battery life appears to be their main disadvantage. He said batteries on hybrids tend to be replaced more often than on conventional diesel buses and at a very high cost that can wipe out any cost savings from fuel economy.
The STM's 2015 report recommends hybrid buses be configured to limit the number of times electric batteries take over for the diesel engines. The recommendation is for the engines to be automatically shut off only when the onboard electric batteries are charged at 100 per cent, when the bus is stationary, and when its doors are open.
Back in February, when doubts were first cast on the fuel efficiency of the STM's hybrid buses, Plante said she intended to go ahead with the purchase anyway.
"There is no way as a city we could have ordered 300 more buses that were not even a little bit electric, because of our targets for the environment," Plante said. "We found a good compromise where we know the technology."
STM vice-chairperson Craig Sauvé, the Plante administration's executive committee associate councillor in charge of mobility, said the order was based on recommendations from the foremost experts in the industry.
"The technology we're investing in is the best available technology( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/stm-keeps-buying-hybrid-buses-even-though-the-technology-is-faulty )," Sauvé said. "The STM wouldn't recommend buses that are no good."
jmagder@postmedia.com( mailto:jmagder@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/jasonmagder( http://twitter.com/jasonmagder )
facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist( http://facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist )

