Set out from the Chic Choc Mountains' new wilderness auberge, and you're more likely to come across a moose than another backcountry skier
? Leaving the comfort of the Chic-Chocs Mountain Lodge behind, our disparate group started its climb to the base of Mount 780 -- so named because no one's ever really named it.
The first few kilometres were gentle, belying. But when the switchbacks started in earnest, the effort began to show on the faces of the more urbane among us. The snow was crusty, but our short, fat skis dug right in. Then, after about two hours, we started our descent, telemarking through the abundant powder, swerving around snow-clad trees.
Until recently, the sole outpost of civilization in the Chic Choc Mountains on Quebec's Gaspé Peninsula was the Gîte du Mont Albert, an 85-room roadside inn that has earned near-mythical status among outdoor enthusiasts. But in December last year, another property opened its doors, providing an even more isolated base for exploring the region.
Two decades in the making, the first wilderness ski mountaineering lodge in Eastern North America was modelled on the backcountry inns of the Rocky Mountains. But according to Gilbert Rioux, the project co-ordinator, the Chic-Chocs Mountain Lodge differs from those in the Rockies in some important ways.
"For one," he said, "we keep vehicle use to a strict minimum. So if you want to ski on the summits around the lodge, you get there by your own leg power and nothing else."
Sépaq, the Quebec government corporation in charge of developing provincial parks, has also encouraged a heavy ecological penchant at the lodge. Organic food is served whenever possible; biodegradable soaps are used; an extensive recycling program is in place; and a peat-filtered sewage system takes care of the rest.
Getting there, as they say, is half the fun. Our adventure started long before we reached the lodge. It started down near the Gulf of St. Lawrence, where we loaded our luggage into a Snowcat. Then we sat back and watched the river, forest and mountains roll by. Two hours later, we arrived at our new weekend home, ready to play.
Visitors who came for the isolation were well served: We skied out from the 18-room lodge into the surrounding 60-square-kilometre wildlife reserve, and for three days the only other souls we crossed paths with were a moose and her calf.
Some of the more adventurous in our group opted to hit the peaks with alpine touring skis. But beginner downhillers be warned: If you aren't able to make quick, sharp turns in deep snow, you'd be best off strapping on snowshoes or Meta backcountry skis -- short, fat, free-heel skis with snowboard-like bindings.
Of course, no one forced us to play in the snow, and more than a few of my fellow guests opted to curl up with a good book near the fire, or in front of the tall bay windows.
One thing we all had our minds on, however, was food. Meals at the lodge were served up in the convivial Gaspé style. In the evening, staff and guests alike sat around long wooden tables, and helped themselves to a family-style meal of braised lamb with lentils and oyster mushrooms, or gravlax with a salad of zucchini and sun-dried tomatoes.
Alain Laflamme, head chef and innkeeper, has worked on both sides of the Atlantic -- in New York and Lausanne, Switzerland. His last stints were as head chef of the renowned Beaver Club in Montreal, and as executive chef at the genteel Château Bon Entente in Quebec City.
The lodge's isolation has presented him with interesting challenges. "We have to work our magic with ingredients that won't spoil during transport, which means we put more emphasis on winter vegetables and the like," Laflamme explains. "So I'll accompany an emincé of pork with red cabbage and braised parsnip."
Just the kind of high-octane fuel we needed on Mount 780.
Pack your skis
GETTING THERE
Air Canada (aircanada.com) offers flights to Mont-Joli, Que., and buses run from Montreal and Quebec City with Orleans Express (orleansexpress.com).
WHERE TO STAY
Rates at the Chic-Chocs Mountain Lodge start at $255 a night per visitor. Prices include transfers from the town of Cap-Chat, guides, equipment, food and accommodations. For more information, call 1-800-665-3091 or visit sepaq.com.

