Cannabis stocks were just one of the top business stories this year. Take this quiz to see how much you remember
a) Bombardier, for making its C Series commercial jet in Montreal
b) Ford, for making the Lincoln MKX in Oakville, Ont.
c) General Motors, for making the Chevrolet Cruze in Mexico
d) Toyota, for making the RAV4 in Woodstock, Ont.
e) General Mills, for making its Old El Paso taco products in Guadalajara
a) The new CEO of grocery chain Metro
b) The new CEO of Cenovus Energy
c) The new chief operating officer of Bank of Montreal
d) The new CEO of Sobeys
e) The Montreal Canadiens' backup goaltender
f) One of the co-accused in the Amaya insider trading case
a) Russian President Vladimir Putin
b) JCF Capital
c) Marriott International
d) Saudi Prince Alwaleed bin Talal
e) Donald Trump, to house all the people in his administration who have resigned or been fired
f) Four Seasons Hotels
Workers start to take down the letters off a Trump Hotel in Toronto.
Graeme Roy/THE CANADIAN PRESS
a) $50-million
b) $118-million
c) $140-million
d) Zero - CP agreed to pay out his benefits as though he retired on schedule
6. How much time passed between Mr. Harrison's taking medical leave from his new employer and his death?
a) Two months
b) Two weeks
c) Eight days
d) Two days
Hunter Harrison, former CEO of Canadian Pacific Railway, listens during an interview in New York.
Chris Goodney/Bloomberg
a) Galen G. Weston
b) Hilary Weston
c) Sarah Richardson
d) Sarah Davis
e) Michael Medline
f) Vicente Trius
a) 5 per cent
b) 8.1 per cent
c) 12 per cent
d) 1.2 per cent
e) It didn't rise at all - it fell more than 5 per cent
a) Joel Blackwell
b) Joel Schlesinger
c) Joel Silver
d) Joel Coen
e) Billy Joel
a) It announced a deal to be acquired by Starbucks Corp.
b) It announced it will supply tea to Tim Hortons outlets
c) It said it would change its corporate colours to orange and red
d) It said the board would consider selling the company
e) It announced a $12-million sponsorship deal with Hockey Night in Canada for a season-long event called "The Great Canadian Tea Party"
f) It announced it would look for another new CEO
U.S President Donald Trump signs an executive order regarding Wall Street reform in the White House.
KEVIN LAMARQUE/REUTERS
a) There was a terrorist attack at an airport in Cairo
b) Donald Trump's administration tried to ban travellers from seven Muslim-majority countries
c) A huge blizzard across the U.S. eastern seaboard cancelled thousands of flights
d) A passenger got dragged off a United Airlines flight, and the video touched off a social-media firestorm
e) Pilots from two U.S. airlines staged a walkout to protest lack of progress in contract talks
a) #GoSponsorHer
b) #ImWithHer
c) #MeToo
d) #ChampionHer
e) #WeveGotHerBack
f) #PromoteAWoman
a) To help the company meet a commitment to deliver streetcars to the Toronto Transit Commission
b) To help fund development of the C Series and Global 7000 aerospace programs
c) To help customers in Asia pay for new Bombardier-designed subway and transit systems
d) To reward the company for persuading the Beaudoin family to give up their multiple-voting shares
e) To set up a new foundation for the education and training of new aerospace machinists
f) To help pay for the company's trade fight with Boeing and the U.S. government over the C Series program
A Bombardier CS300 aircraft lands in Paris.
Jasper Juinen/Bloomberg
a) Because its software was being used by Breitbart News to sell merchandise
b) Because its software was commandeered by Russian hackers who tried to subvert the 2016 U.S. election
c) Because they don't like the hats CEO Tobi Lutke wears
d) Because short-sellers found evidence the company was making unrealistic promises to customers
e) Because one of its directors donated money to Republican candidates
a) "Our mattresses are 10 per cent cheaper than Sleep Country - guaranteed."
b) "Canada's biggest and best mattress retailer."
c) "Sears Canada mattresses - no bedbugs, unlike those other guys."
d) "There is no reason to buy a mattress anywhere else."
e) "Our competitor's mattresses are Sleep Lumpy."
David Friesema, CEO of Sleep Country Canada, sits on a new mattress at a store in Toronto.
Aaron Vincent Elkaim/THE CANADIAN PRESS
a) Revised North American free-trade agreement (aka NAFTA2)
b) Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement
c) Canada-Europe Trade Agreement
d) Canada-Europe Tariffs and Services Agreement
e) United Kingdom-Canada Post-Brexit Framework
f) Canada-Europe Toffee Agreement
a) Trading subprime mortgage-backed securities
b) Talking to a reporter without authorization
c) Opening a savings account with Wells Fargo
d) Speaking to a recruiter for Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley
e) Trading bitcoin
a) Procter and Gamble
b) Nestlé
c) Unilever
d) PepsiCo
e) Mondelez International
f) Restaurant Brands International
Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase, speaks to an assistant during a committee hearing in Washington.
Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg
a) They banned him from being a director or officer of any public company
b) They locked him in a room and forced him to listen to Conrad Black explain for hours why he never should have been imprisoned for his actions at Hollinger International
c) They ordered him to pay $10-million in restitution to Livent shareholders
d) They ordered him to sing Phantom of the Opera in Nathan Phillips Square in sub-zero temperatures
a) Cost-cutting measures have cheapened the product
b) Franchisees are being forced to absorb new costs
c) The stores are forced to use lower-quality equipment that sometimes breaks
d) The new corporate mascot, "Tim Cruller," is a laughingstock
e) all of the above
f) a and b
g) a, b and c
a) $15.02
b) $22.95
c) $6.92
d) $4.20
e) $9.25 - about the same as the price of a burrito with avocado
A customer orders food at a Freshii Inc. location in Vancouver.
Ben Nelms/Bloomberg
a) 2019
b) 2020
c) 2027
d) 2035
e) 2045
f) 2066
g) Never
a) 7.5 per cent
b) 10 per cent
c) Prime rate plus 4 per cent
d) No interest was paid, but HOOPP was given an option to buy 5 per cent of the company at a discounted price
a) $9.55
b) $10.50
c) $12.75
d) $14.94
e) $15.50
Warren Buffett, chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, speaks during an interview at a restaurant in New York.
Chris Goodney/Bloomberg
a) 69 storeys
b) 63 storeys
c) 70 storeys
d) 68 storeys - only floor 13 is missing
e) 60 storeys
a) Galen G. Weston of Loblaw and George Weston
b) Keith Creel of Canadian Pacific Railway
c) Darryl White of Bank of Montreal
d) André Desmarais of Power Corp. of Canada
e) Roy Gori of Manulife Financial
f) Steve Laut of Canadian Natural Resources
a) A clause that allows a home buyer to back out of a binding offer on a house, if the market declines by more than 10 per cent before closing
b) A clause that allows a would-be buyer to win a bidding war for a house by promising to automatically top the best price from any other bidder by a preset amount
c) A clause that entitles the seller of a home to an additional $20,000 payment if the new owner flips it within 18 months of buying it
d) A clause that stipulates any escalators and elevators must be properly inspected before the sale can close
e) A clause that pays the real estate agent an additional 0.5 percentage points on the transaction if the house sells for more than $100,000 over the asking price
a) About 82.6 cents
b) About 79.9 cents
c) About 85 cents
d) About 75.5 cents
Bright economic news sent the Canadian dollar higher after it touched a low of 72.73 cents (U.S.) in early May.
Adrian Wyld/The Canadian Press
Rogers CEO Joe Natale poses for a portrait in Toronto.
Christopher Katsarov/The Globe and Mail
Stephen Poloz, the governor of the Bank of Canada, speaks during a news conference in Ottawa.
FRED CHARTRAND/THE CANADIAN PRESS
A Jean Coutu pharmacy in Ste. Marthe-sur-le-Lac, Que.
Ryan Remiorz/THE CANADIAN PRESS
Canopy Growth is the largest publicly-traded marijuana producer in Canada.
Canopy Growth
Answers
1. c
2. b
3. b
4. Chief executive officer of CSX Corp.
5. b
6. d
7. d
8. e
9. c
10. d
11. b
12. a
13. b
14. a
15. d
16. b
17. e
18. c
19. a
20. 1998
21. g
22. c
23. e
24. b
25. a
26. b
27. b
28. b
29. a
30. September
31. Twice
32. f
33. b
34. d
35. b
36. d
37. d
38. d
39. Constellation Brands
40. c
41. d
42. b
43. g
44. b
45. c
46. c
47. d
48. b
49. b
50. c

