QUEBEC - As Quebec health officials scrambled in late summer to prevent a flood of new COVID-19 infections, some doctors and researchers questioned whether the prevention measures would be effective. Now, cases have risen to levels not seen since near the peak of the pandemic.
"Something is not working in Quebec," said Dr. Nima Machouf, an epidemiologist at l'Université de Montréal. "When we look at the numbers, we look at Quebec and we compare it to the rest of Canada. In Quebec, it's not going well. In Ontario, they're a much larger population, but they have half as many patients. "
The provincial government's response, she and several other experts told the Montreal Gazette on Monday, lacked severity early, when the second wave was still a bump. A failure to prevent private gatherings in early September probably contributed to the new surge in infections, they said, which is prompting the government to institute new, lockdown-like measures in Quebec City and Montreal.
Quebec Health Minister Christian Dubé and Dr. Horacio Arruda, the director of public health, repeatedly urged the public to avoid gatherings indoors but took no further measures to prevent them from happening.
"Is it the message that didn't come through?" Machouf wondered. "They never stopped telling us to stop gathering indoors. We know there is a risk of contagion."
Some experts said the government needed to emphasize communicating clear policies to Quebecers. A volley of inconsistent messages, they said, left room for people to bend or break the guidelines or fell upon the deaf ears of a tired public who had lived through a lockdown and were enjoying their freedom.
Dr. Matthew Oughton, an infectious disease specialist at the Jewish General Hospital and assistant professor in the department of medicine at McGill University, said Dubé's recent plea for Quebecers to avoid social gatherings for 28 days lacked clarity.
"It's not clear whether it's a suggestion or a strongly worded request," he said. "It doesn't appear to have the force of law and yet with the current level of transmission that we're seeing, clear action is needed."
Oughton and other experts also questioned the government's refusal to mandate masks in classrooms. Non-medical masks are mandatory indoors throughout the province, but not for schoolchildren in classrooms or in theatres, when attendees are sitting down.
"They cannot give mixed messages that don't make any sense," said Dr. Parisa Ariya, a professor in the departments of atmospheric and oceanic sciences and chemistry at McGill University who has published numerous articles on the spread of bioaerosols.
She said a collection of newly published research indicates that the virus can spread farther than two metres and criticized the government's failure to mandate masks in all indoor settings. It adds ambiguity to a problem that, in her view, should be clear cut: masks work. When people are indoors together, in any setting, they should wear them, she insisted.
"Indoors is the worst place (for the virus)," she said.
Health officials should have erred on the side of caution rather than downplayed and resisted evidence pointing to the possibility that the virus can spread as an aerosol, she argued. Masks should have been made mandatory indoors earlier, and they should now be worn at gatherings of all kinds, she said.
Some experts expressed sympathy with government decision-makers. Officials in Quebec have been trying to walk a careful tightrope: on one side, they are attempting to limit the economic and social impacts of lockdown measures; on the other side, they want to prevent cases from rising to dangerous levels.
"I certainly don't envy my colleagues at public health for having to make these decisions," said Dr. Brian Ward, a professor in the department of medicine at McGill University, "because it's pretty easy to look back, three, four weeks later and say 'OK, that's not what we wanted to happen.' "
Although COVID-19 cases are climbing in many countries and in several other Canadian provinces, Quebec remains the epicentre of the pandemic in Canada, as it was in the spring.
"The first time, it is conceivable that Quebec was disadvantaged by having an early spring break and an influx of travellers and all this other stuff, but this time we don't have that as a reason," Oughton said.
Cases of COVID-19 are rising in countries around the world: the U.K., Poland, the Netherlands and Spain, but each country is responding to the pandemic differently and some are having better results than others. South Korea, for example, has aggressively stamped out the infection and appears to have repressed a second wave.
The experts who spoke to the Montreal Gazette said Quebec should actively seek lessons from other countries and follow their leads.
"We have to learn from others," Machouf said. "We have to see what are the others doing that we're doing poorly. That's the way we will be able to solve the problem."
mlapierre@postmedia.com
Related
Longueuil high school shut down as COVID-19 infects 7 teachers, 26 students
Coronavirus live updates: Swamped test centres may turn away low-risk people, Quebec warns
All our coronavirus-related news can be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here
You might also be interested in...
Records reveal chaos in the days before staff abandoned the Herron
Fake nurse in Quebec discovered and fired after 20 years on the job
Fitness: Do you really need to log 10,000 steps a day?

