Montreal's morning rush hour was slowed but not snarled Thursday as a major low-pressure system( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/snow-and-ice-and-nothing-is-nice-in-montreal-weather-warning ) packing a double-barrelled dose of rain and snow tightened its grip on the city and the province.
While on-island and most Laval school boards remained in operation, those north of Laval were announcing closures due to a heavy overnight snowfall.
Montreal's Trudeau airport( https://www.admtl.com/fr/vols/departs ) was also feeling the effects of the weather system, which is expected to sweep east across much of the province by Friday. While most scheduled overseas departures were able to take off Thursday morning, many domestic or U.S. flights were cancelled or delayed. Meanwhile, most scheduled arrivals between 10:30 a.m. and noon had been re-scheduled cancelled or delayed. Travellers are advised to check their flight status before heading to the airport.
By 11 a.m., road conditions in the Montreal area were displaying a distinct, north south split, with thoroughfares north of the Metropolitan Expressway reporting snow covered or partially covered conditions while midtown highway remained relatively clear.
The storm system, which originated in the American southwest, is expected to dump up to 45 centimetres in certain regions of the province, according to Environment Canada. And high winds of up to 70 km/h are expected in the Montreal area in time for the afternoon commute.
The fact the system's fallout was striking harder north of the Saint Lawrence was evidenced mid-morning by power failures( https://poweroutages.hydroquebec.com/poweroutages/service-interruption-report/index.html#bis ) in the Laurentians, Outaouais and Lanaudière regions that left more than 22,000 customers without electricity - more than 13,000 of them in the Laurentians.
The Montreal area is expected to receive 10 to 15 centimetres of precipitation( https://montrealgazette.com/news/blizzard-proof-a-spadeful-of-tips-for-safe-snow-shovelling ), which started to fall as rain overnight and continued to do so through the morning.
Environment Canada meteorologist André Cantin said conditions created by the system are expected to be "particularly difficult Thursday morning in the Outaouais, the north of Montreal, Lanaudière, then move toward Trois-Rivières and Quebec City later in the morning."
Twenty-five to 45 centimetres of snow are expected to fall in the Laurentians, Lanaudière, the Mauricie region, Quebec City and the Côte-Nord, Bas-Saint-Laurent and Gaspé regions.
Whiteouts caused by the high winds are also expected to reduce visibility on highways along the St. Lawrence River, particularly in the Chaudière-Appalaches region.
Other road closures could be added( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang ) should the ministry receive information from motorists reporting deteriorating conditions via the quebec511.info website.( https://www.quebec511.info/en/Default.aspx )
The system's impact will be less intense in the areas of Sherbrooke, Victoriaville, Lac-Mégantic, Sorel-Tracy, Drummondville and Thetford Mines, with rain and a little snow on Thursday afternoon.
This story will be updated.
Related
Keep this: Your guide to surviving a Montreal winter( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-survival-guide )

