There is one question uppermost in most Canadiens fans' minds in the weeks following yet another disastrous season for the bleu-blanc-et-rouge. What is Marc Bergevin's( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/stu-cowan-canadiens-gm-marc-bergevin-didnt-make-the-grade-this-season ) famous plan that he keeps talking about?
If Habs president Geoff Molson is keeping his general manager even though the team Bergevin built finished 28th in a 31-team league, it's because Bergevin has convinced him he has a strategy to put the Canadiens back on track as early as next season. It's clear Molson and Bergevin have no plans to start a slow, long-term rebuild à la the Toronto Maple Leafs of recent years and it's equally clear there are not going to be major management changes during the summer.
So what's the plan, Stan? Picture this: Molson and Bergevin are huddled on the seventh floor of the Bell Centre and they know the rabble-rousing masses are gathered outside the rink, with pitchforks and clubs in hand ready to storm Fortress Habs. They can hear the chants through the closed windows - Fire Bergevin! Fire Trevor Timmins! Bring in a real president of hockey operations!
Now Bergevin is nothing if not a survivor. He lasted 19 years in the NHL even though he was never more than a journeyman defenceman. He wasn't good enough for any of us to have heard of him, but he was good enough to stay gainfully employed in the best hockey league in the world for nearly two decades. So he was doing something right.
And he's also survived six years as GM even though his team is failing. So he knows how to stay alive. He knows he brings a street credibility his boss doesn't have. Bergevin comes from down the hill, growing up on the tough streets of Pointe-St-Charles, and he also has the smarts that come from a couple of decades in NHL rinks and dressing rooms. When you think about it, it's not surprising that Molson retains this admiration for him.
Canadiens' Paul Byron pursues New York Islanders' John Tavares in Montreal on Jan. 15, 2018.
In any case, with the sound of the mob outside, Bergevin leans in and tells the boss he has a plan and it's directly related to his old-school hockey cred. He famously played alongside Mario Lemieux for the pee-wee AA Ville-Émard Hurricanes during the '70s, but he also played on the same team in the QMJHL with Pat Brisson, who is one of the top hockey agents in the world.
And guess who Brisson represents, among many other superstars? That's right. A chap named John Tavares. If he's not signed by the New York Islanders, the 27-year-old centre will become one of the hottest free agents to hit the NHL market in ages, and I have it from good sources Bergevin has suggested to the big boss he has an inside track on the ultra-talented player from suburban Toronto.
And maybe he does. Tavares loves Montreal, the team has the cap space to sign him, and, perhaps most importantly, Habs management has the desperation to maybe roll out the red carpet in a way that no other team will to snare this prize catch. Much will depend on Bergevin's sales job. Obviously, his key argument will be they are poised to win with a healthy Carey Price and Shea Weber on the back end. He'll argue Montreal faltered because those two superstars were ailing and the team lacked a No. 1 centre.
Price and Weber back in fighting form, plus Tavares, equals a contender. Or so goes the argument. And what if Paul Stastny is also part of the Bergevin plan. The 32-year-old Winnipeg Jets winger can also become an unrestricted free agent on July 1.
Related
Montreal Canadiens look for winning ways on Twitter( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/montreal-canadiens-look-for-winning-ways-on-twitter )
Stastny and Jets beat Predators in Game 7, advance to Western Conference final( http://montrealgazette.com/pmn/sports-pmn/hockey-sports-pmn/newsalert-jets-beat-predators-in-game-7-advance-to-western-conference-final/wcm/9eecf04d-33f1-4466-a5e9-42c9aa3c743a )
What the Puck: Habs' return to glory a matter of dollars and sense( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/montreal-canadiens/what-the-puck-habs-return-to-glory-a-matter-of-dollars-and-sense )
The biggest caveat here in this blue-sky scenario is Price. You don't win anything with bad goaltending and if you doubt that, you might want to have a chat today with Nashville Predators GM David Poile. There were other factors, but the fact is Preds goalie Pekka Rinne( https://www.sportsnet.ca/hockey/nhl/preds-rinne-says-let-teammates-terrible-feeling/ ) has almost single-handedly cost his team two key series - against Pittsburgh last spring and against the Jets on Thursday, when he was pulled from Game 7 after surrendering two bad goals in the first 11 minutes. You don't need the best goalie in the world to win, but you need a Top 10 goalie.
We used to think Price was the best goalie in the world, but he was the worst goalie in the league this season. Will he bounce back? Who knows. From the start of his mediocre play - which actually began at the end of Michel Therrien's tenure as coach - I've been saying the problem is between Price's ears.
No one except Price( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/stu-cowan-8 ) and maybe his bosses know what those issues are between his ears, but you have to think his terrible play is going to be a factor in Tavares' decision to sign, or not sign, with Montreal. In the end, that might be the toughest part of Bergevin's sales job.
bkelly@postmedia.com( mailto:bkelly@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz( http://www.twitter.com/brendanshowbiz )
CREDIT: Brendan Kelly, Montreal Gazette

