Montreal's Dora Wasserman Yiddish Theatre Company
? Bryna Wasserman strives to maintain her calm as she directs the actors and technicians during a harried, last-minute dress rehearsal. Standing in the front row of the theatre, overseeing a run through of ,one of two plays the company is preparing to perform, Wasserman's sense of urgency is fairly understandable. The company that bears the name of her mother, Dora Wasserman, must work with just a few hours of tech rehearsal to get their act together. Standing at just over five feet tall, hands clenched together, the petite powerhouse Wasserman hurries her cast members off the stage in preparation for setting up the next scene.
It could be any theatre company in the throes of impending opening-night mayhem, but this scene was playing itself out in a different context. Wasserman was directing the Sholem Aleichem play in Vienna's Akzent Theatre, marking her company's second trip to the city in four years to perform theatre in Yiddish.
Invited by Kurt Rosenkranz, the founder of Vienna's Judisches Institut, Wasserman and 38 cast and crewmembers staged two excellent examples of Yiddish theatre, despite the deadline frenzy. As well as ,written by the famous Yiddish writer Aleichem (upon whose stories was based), the troupe performed (Green Fields), a light romantic comedy by Peretz Hirshbein.
Both are musicals and were written in Yiddish, but the similarities stop there. Though has some entertaining moments, it was that offered substantive intrigue and points of connection for the audiences, a good proportion of who were members of Vienna's Jewish community.
Set in Czarist Russia, the play's story involves two men, one Jewish and the other Gentile (played by Ben Mazor and Elan Kunin respectively), who trade identities for a time in order to pursue romantic interests. As a result, the Gentile learns of the hardships faced by Jewish citizens. The play couldn't help but touch audiences in the middle of Vienna, in particular the Jews who attended. "I couldn't really hold back my tears," one Jewish woman told me as she exited the theatre after the opening-night performance of . In particular, she said she'd responded to a song sung in the final moments of the play, after the Rabbi character (played by Montreal lawyer Pinchas Blitt) warns of the possible threat that could soon face the Jews. In the staging of these final eerily prescient moments, Wasserman has the walls of the set move slowly inwards towards the cast who are singing. This final bit of movement suggested an ominous sense of the world closing in on this theatrical representation of European Jewry.
As successful as the shows have proven, with almost-sold-out houses, favourable press from the Viennese critics and audience members left (Yiddish for choked up; overwhelmed) in wake, Wasserman explains that the road to Vienna was not a simple one for her troupe. The invite came from Rosenkranz, 75, after he visited Montreal and saw the company perform. While there are other Yiddish theatre companies -- including ones based in New York, Poland, Romania and Israel -- Rosenkranz argues that "the company in Montreal is the best in the world."
But upon receiving the initial invite, Wasserman says not everyone in the company was entirely thrilled about the prospect of venturing to Austria, a place where Yiddish was virtually wiped out by the Nazis during the Second World War. Prior to Hitler's invasion, Vienna had been home to 200,000 Jews, many of them fluent in Yiddish. The city had at least 30 synagogues (the Nazis left one standing, only because fire marshalls warned them that if it were burned down, the fire would threaten adjacent buildings), and two Yiddish theatre companies. The city had been a centre of Jewish cultural, political, religious and intellectual life. Sigmund Freud produced most of his oeuvre here; Theodor Herzl wrote his landmark article on Zionism, The Jewish State, in the city in 1896, making Vienna the birthplace of political Zionism. Today's Vienna stands in sharp contrast: the city's Jewish population is approximately 8,000.
Montreal's Jewish community has the third largest Holocaust survivor population in the world; thus many of the troupe feel directly touched by the war, either through relatives or, in some cases, by their own experiences. Pinchas Blitt, lawyer by day, Yiddish theatre performer by night, was a young child during the war years, when his family hid out in the Ukrainian forest to evade the Nazis. When the concept of taking a show to Vienna came up four years ago, Blitt says he wasn't entirely against the idea. But, he tells me through a flowing white beard, he did pipe up at a meeting, discussing his sense that the Austrian people had still not come to terms with their past as collaborators in the Holocaust. "I wasn't necessarily against going to Austria," Blitt explains. "But I wanted my fellow actors to know where we were going. To understand exactly what it is we might be facing, and the kind of people who do live there, and what some of their attitudes still are."
Still, Wasserman managed to convince her troupe of the significance of such a trip. The very act of performing Yiddish in a place where the language was almost completely extinguished through genocide, she argued, would be inherently radical.
Bolstering her argument was the company's invitee, Rosenkranz himself, a survivor who founded his institute as a means of educating Gentile Austrians about Jewish people and culture. Rosenkranz began his institute in 1991 after guiding a tour through one of the city's synagogues. It was at this point, he recalls, that he felt the calling to educate people about Jewish culture. "It hit me then that this was why I'd survived."
Still, many in the company still seemed a bit queasy about the venture. "We decided our trips to Vienna would be tours. [A Yiddish word translating roughly as "in your face."]We wanted to illustrate that this language is still very much alive, which has always been part of our mandate."
While the company did maintain their focus, pulling their shows off with a great deal of finesse, it's fair to say that Austria's historical role in the Holocaust hung over the trip like a bad stench. The crew and cast find themselves discussing their feelings about encountering the often chilly and crusty Austrians, notorious for maintaining a certain social distance. Not knowing entirely what to expect, members of the troupe find a few of their worst suspicions about contemporary Austria confirmed during the tour.
Driving on a tour through the Austrian countryside, Aaron Gonshor, an actor with the troupe who's an oral surgeon by day, says he found himself in an uncomfortable historical debate with their tour guide. "Someone on the bus was mentioning that they understood was not a particularly popular film in Austria," says the mustachioed Gonshor, looking a wee bit like a Marx Brother. The driver then proceeded to explain that the depictions of Austrians as Nazi collaborators was off-putting to much of the Austrian public, seeing as 60 per cent of Austrians were opposed to Hitler's arrival in the country.
"I'm not sure what was worse," Gonshor says. "His defensiveness or his complete rewriting of history." (The history books are quite clear about Austrian complicity in Hitler's campaign; when faced with a referendum on Hitler's burgeoning empire in 1938, 96 per cent of Austrians responded favourably to the dictator's advance into Austria.)
But the nastiest moment came for Jack Ossof, who plays a vagabond in . Heading to a tavern one night after a show, Ossof brushed up against a few skinheads. "As they came closer, we realized that they had shaved heads and black boots on. They were stomping on the pavement and chanting '!' over and over again -- I couldn't believe my eyes."
While Wasserman is clearly pleased with her company and their theatrical output, she concedes she would have liked to have brought a more politically risqué piece of work to Vienna. Originally, she had envisioned bringing the company's production of Jon Marans's 1996 two-hander, . Set contemporarily in Vienna, the play artfully raises questions of both Jewish identity and Austrian complicity in the war.
Rosenkranz felt differently. "It's a provocation for Austrians, this play. The Canadians can't really understand this. For Montreal audiences this would be something special. Not for those in Vienna. Austrian audiences want to laugh, to cry, but they don't want a confrontation." Rosenkranz insists this is not a case of self-censorship, despite the fact that his organization receives all of its funding from government coffers.
The differing tastes in plays pointed up a slight rift between the Austrian Jews and Canadian Jews in terms of what they felt would be an appropriate way to address Austria's past today, while performing in Yiddish.
"What Kurt [Rosenkranz]has in mind, I don't know," Blitt says. "He knows the situation in Vienna better than I do, obviously. But I suspect that if you're afraid to say what you want, then something is wrong, something is not kosher, something is not right.
"What's the point of freedom, of putting on a show, if you can't say what's really on your mind?"

