In the wake of 2017's historic flooding, the Quebec government said it will pour more money into disaster preparedness, and make it easier for future victims to get compensation.
That was the gist of a new 24-point plan( https://www.securitepublique.gouv.qc.ca/securite-civile/publications-et-statistiques/plan-action.html ) to improve the response to disasters unveiled Thursday.
Other measures included improving disaster plans in cities, simplifying information for victims on the province's website, and revisiting urban plans to ensure there is no new development within floodplains.
Public Security Minister Martin Coiteux said his department was overwhelmed by a deluge of people claiming damages in last spring's floods( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood ), with more than 6,000 claimants, compared to the usual 100 or so per year. He said because of that volume, the ministry had to hire and train new staff, which caused delays for victims to receive compensation for their damages.
He said for future incidents the ministry will train employees that are already on staff in other governmental departments to work with disaster victims so that if there is a major incident, they can be pressed into action.
"It will allow us to have a permanent squad so we don't have to hire as many temporary employees," Coiteux said.
He said the province will also allow cities and towns to handle claims if they wish to do so, and that could make it faster and more efficient for victims to get compensation.
The plan also comes with $20.5 million for cities to update floodplain maps that are in some cases woefully out of date, and another $20 million to come up with updated disaster relief plans.
"The work will take several years, and we have to start right now," Coiteux said.
The Montreal Metropolitan Community issued a statement on Thursday welcoming the news. The MMC will receive $5.5 million to update floodplain maps in the region, according to the plan. The MMC added it is also working to put in place a tool that will allow it to forecast river levels three days in advance.
Springtime flooding in 2017 affected more than 5,300 homes over 291 cities and towns, the government said, forcing more than 4,000 people to leave their homes. As of Thursday about 100 people were still being housed in hotels because repairs on their homes are not yet complete, Coiteux said. About $135 million had already been paid to about 80 per cent of the people claiming damages.
Coiteux pointed out that the damages from last year's flooding was unprecedented, and he doesn't expect the situation to be as drastic this year( http://montrealgazette.com/news/at-risk-areas-of-quebec-are-on-flood-watch-coiteux-tells-reporters ). However, he said the ministry will be better prepared for future disasters.
Quebec's new disaster plan was not welcomed by everyone.
The Coalition Avenir Québec said in a statement the plan did not say how the government would mobilize more forces to help in the wake of a disaster. Coiteux also didn't address how he would lighten the bureaucratic process for disaster victims,
Benoit Charette, the CAQ MNA for Deux-Montagnes said the city of Deux-Montagnes has been asking the ministry to build a new dike that can prevent future flooding, but has so far been stonewalled.
jmagder@postmedia.com( mailto:jmagder@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/JasonMagder( http://Twitter.com/JasonMagder )
Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist( http://Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist )
Related
More of our 2017-2018 flood coverage( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood )
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

