Did you have a good rest? Here's what happened while you got some shuteye.
No business like snow business: Quebec ski hills have been suffering from what they call sidewalk syndrome( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-ski-hills-brace-for-more-bad-weather-but-say-conditions-are-good ) - when local skiers see green lawns and bare sidewalks and elect to stay home. "I got pictures from Mont Sutton today, and it looks like a picture perfect Christmas over there, but sitting in Montreal you can't imagine that this could be the case," said Yves Juneau, the CEO of the Quebec Ski Area Association. Most area ski hills are reporting hard-packed surfaces, but Juneau said the fact there has not been a major snowfall in more than a month is merely a perception problem. The freezing rain, rain and warm temperatures in the forecast for most of the province is decidedly bad marketing, but Juneau doesn't believe the wet weather will put a huge damper on ski conditions. "When you're at 3,000 feet in altitude, like in Mont Tremblant, I can pretty much guarantee the mountain will get some snow."
The stars are aligned: Quebecer Frederic Pelletier is boldly predicting he and his team will get the New Horizons spacecraft( https://montrealgazette.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/quebecs-pelletier-leads-farthest-exploration-of-any-planetary-body-in-history/wcm/918b0479-f607-4bc1-a6a2-72450fad75d9 ) exactly where it should be on New Year's Day - 1.6 billion kilometres beyond Pluto to rendezvous with a space rock known as Ultima Thule. The goal of the NASA mission is to pass by the region known as the "Kuiper Belt" and send data back to Earth that can help explain the origins of the solar system. The flyby of Ultima Thule is being described by the space agency as the "farthest exploration of any planetary body in history." NASA contracted Pelletier to be the chief navigator of the spacecraft for the New Horizons mission, whose original plan was to fly past Pluto. The team reached its goal when the vehicle successfully flew by the dwarf planet on July 14, 2015, and sent back data "that resulted in profound new insights about Pluto and its moons," according to the space agency's website. Pelletier said: "I'm a bit nervous, but I feel confident ... all the stars are aligned."
The prodigal Clydesdale: Cindy Thomas's Christmas present this year has very hairy legs, weighs almost a tonne and goes by the name of Molly. Molly the Clydesdale disappeared last fall from the family's property near Evansburg, Alta., without a trace. But on Christmas Eve the six-year-old draft horse mysteriously turned up again on their land, brushed and groomed. Thomas did not think she would ever see Molly again and recently returned money people had donated for a reward that was offered for the mare's return. Thomas has called Molly her "big shy girl" and says she couldn't be happier to have her home. She calls it "the best gift ever."
Helping themselves: Two homeless men have been charged with burglary after a California man said he came home to find them cooking dinner. Robby Spillman tells KNBC-TV he returned from Christmas shopping last Friday to find the men in his Santa Monica apartment. Spillman says the men, who stank and wore filthy, ripped clothing, told him they hadn't expected him home so soon and asked if they could "hang out" for a while. Spillman says he played along, asked if they had enough food, then pretended to take his French bulldog for a walk and called 911. Nineteen-year-old Markis White and 29-year-old Elijah Smart were arrested. It's unclear whether they have a lawyer. Meanwhile, Spillman and his pregnant girlfriend plan to find a new home.
The Canadian Press and Associated Press contributed to this report.

