With the nights shortest of the year, there are not too many hours left for stargazing, but they are filled with celestial happenings and seasonal stellar landmarks.
Look up after 10 p.m. any night in July and the famous Summer Triangle pattern formed by the bright stars Deneb, Altair and Vega rides low in the southeastern sky while the iconic Big Dipper dominates the high northwest sky. Face the south around 10 p.m. on a clear night and the S-shaped constellation Scorpius stretches up from the horizon. Pinning down the scorpion in the sky is its heart, represented by the bright orange star Antares. A red supergiant with a diameter about 830 times larger than our Sun, Antares shines 60,000 times brighter and is a distant 553 light-years away.
Not sure how to find Antares? On July 22 the Moon will be parked just above the bright star, making for a convenient guidepost.
If you have binoculars or a telescope, it's worth scanning this part of the sky, and even from light-polluted suburbs you can see the region is chock full of clusters and clouds of stars. That's because Scorpius lies in the same direction as the Milky Way core, making it one of the best panoramic stargazing tours of the summer.
In planetary action, you don't want to miss Mars since it will be at its biggest and brightest in our skies in 15 years. On July 27, the Red Planet will reach its closest approach to Earth as it orbits the Sun. Astronomers call it an opposition when the planet will be directly opposite the Sun in Earth's sky, so that Mars appears to rise in the east at sunset and set in the west at sunrise. By 1 a.m. local time it will appear high in the southern sky in the constellation Capricornus - the sea goat.
Mars makes a close pass by Earth every two years, but this month's cosmic geometry places Mars only 55 million kilometres from us, offering amazing views for skywatchers. It is nearly as close as its best encounter back in 2003 when it was the nearest to us in 60,000 years! It will only be 2 million km farther this time around - nothing an average skywatcher will notice.
With just the naked eye it will appear as an unusually bright orange-hued star rising in the east as darkness falls. It's amazing to think that despite being so far away we can still see its distinct colour due to the reddish iron-oxide-rich dust and sand that covers most of the surface. Normally if you have a telescope you can also catch sight of its bight white polar caps and the darker highlands and lighter-toned deserts. But NASA has recently confirmed that Mars is undergoing a global dust storm, so unless it dissipates in the next few weeks, it may obscure some of the finer surface features.
Adding to the cosmic spectacle, on the nights of July 26 and 27, just in time for its best performance, the Red Planet will pair up with the brilliant Moon. Both these celestial gems will be eye-catching, gliding together across the night sky.
For more skywatching tips follow me at facebook.com/thenightskyguy( http://facebook.com/thenightskyguy )
CREDIT: Steve Faguy, Montreal Gazette

