Just in time for the latest heat wave, city of Montreal pools start gradually reopening on Saturday.
But the experience will be different due to public-health directives related to the coronavirus pandemic.
Physical-distancing measures are in place and pools may impose restrictions on the number of people allowed in at any given time, the city says.
Some boroughs may also restrict how long people are allowed to stay.
Washrooms are open but changing rooms are closed. Some boroughs may not allow access to shower areas.
Anyone with COVID-19 symptoms or who is in voluntary or obligatory isolation is barred from using pools.
Confederation pool in Montreal on Sunday June 21, 2020 was opened to the public. Joaquin Poundja, Karen Fortin and their children 3-year-old Elias and 5-year-old Lhassa enjoy beating the heat at the pool. Dave Sidaway / Montreal Gazette
Some splash pads and wading pools had previously opened
The city of Montreal has posted an interactive map showing locations of pools, wading pools and splash pads, as well as their operating hours.
For more information on pool rules, visit this page on the city of Montreal website.
Environment Canada says the hot weather - humidex values near 40 - is expected to linger for several more days
Quebec's health department says people can protect themselves from the heat by:
Drinking six to eight glasses of water per day.
Avoiding alcohol.
When possible, spending at least two hours a day in air-conditioned or cool places.
Taking at least one cool shower or bath per day, or cooling skin several times per day with wet towels.
Limiting physical activities.
Wearing light clothes.
It also advises the public to never leave a child or a baby alone in a vehicle, even for a short period - and to check in on loved ones, especially those who are vulnerable or living alone.
More tips: It may seem, counterproductive but keeping windows shut is advised because open windows allow heat in. Shades and blinds can help keep sunlight and heat out. When the temperature drops at night, re-open windows and to let in cooler air in, although there will not be much relief in the next couple of days, even at night. The low tonight is expected to be 22 C. The evening temperature is expected to drop to 17 or 18 C by Thursday.
Cool washcloths around the neck are helpful and you might even consider putting sheets in a fridge or freezer for help getting to sleep.
Related
Montreal weather: The heat wave hits its peak
Coronavirus: Quebec authorizes use of public pools to beat the heat
Coronavirus: What's open and closed in Montreal

