How best to heat Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue's community centre has become a matter for debate.
The Harpell Centre is located at the intersection of St. Pierre St. and Highway 20. It was built in 1948 and has long been considered the heart of the community. The building has been expanded three times and now houses the town's recreational services, a community hall, the library and a swimming pool and wading pool.
Last June, the town announced that the centre would get an overhaul and the focus of the work would be to make the Art Deco, heritage building more energy-efficient and to reduce the heat-island effect in the area.
A $232,058 federal grant connected to the Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program was added to town funds for a budget of around $500,000. In the plans: change the asphalt roof for a white roof which better reflects the heat, correct grade on terrace to improve water run-off and replace 25 per cent of terrace paving with greenery, upgrade plumbing and replace all doors and windows with energy-efficient units. It was also decided that the electric heating would be converted to natural gas.
Resident Bruno Haas questioned the wisdom of the heating decision during a presentation of the town's 2018 budget last week after he learned that $85,000 was earmarked for the conversion in the town's three-year capital investment plan.
He said the decision to heat with fossil fuel contradicted the spirit of the town's application for a federal grant - mentioned earlier in the evening - which would pay up to 50 per cent of the cost of putting in place a long-term plan to deal with the effects of climate change.
Director general Martin Bonhomme said their research showed that heating with natural gas was less costly. He said heating the pool with electricity cost $28,000. Heating with natural gas cost $15,800.
"It costs less, so that justifies harming the planet by worsening climate change?" Haas asked. His comments were applauded.
During an interview the day after the public meeting, Mayor Paola Hawa said that council was open to taking a closer look at the heating plan, but that the choice to heat with natural gas had not been taken lightly and that it hadn't been based solely on cost efficiency.
"In the case of a (town-wide) emergency such as a complete blackout like the one we experienced in the 1998 ice storm, the Harpell Centre is the gathering point - the emergency headquarters," Hawa said. "If there is no electricity for heating, can we still use it as an emergency centre?"
She said that one citizen had suggested installing a geothermal heating system which relies on silos buried underground but that kind of heating system was problematic because it required more land than was available.
"The No. 1 priority for me, is safety for the citizens," Hawa said.
kgreenaway@postmedia.com( mailto:kgreenaway@postmedia.com )
CREDIT: Kathryn Greenaway, Montreal Gazette

