The journey has become the destination
Railway barons should forget freight and bring on the scenery. Passengers await. So perhaps do profits.
Luxury train travel, when it's done properly, makes the journey the destination and cultivates a kinship among travellers that can never be achieved in a claustrophobic airplane.
Here are some Canadian train trips to get your holiday on a roll: Whistler Northwind This 745-kilometre luxury passenger service was launched this month by Crown-owned BC Rail. Linking Vancouver with Prince George, it showcases the province's scenic heartland from the comfort of first-class rolling stock.
BC Rail is well placed to tap the multimillion-dollar market of affluent rail romantics. It already boasts a wide variety of passenger rail services and it owns its rail lines, meaning passenger services aren't treated as irritating interruptions of freight schedules. And BC Rail's lines run through some of the world's most diverse and spectacular scenery.
The nine-car, 220-passenger Northwind represents a $12-million start-up investment. It features three new $1.75-million dome coaches outfitted with wrap-around tempered-glass windows custom-built for BC Rail in Denver, Colo. The train also includes such refurbished classics as the 1939 Summit service club car built for the Florida East Coast Railroad and the Panorama club car built in 1954 for the Canadian National Railway.
The Northwind's inaugural run exposed a number of minor operating hiccups. It also revealed a dedication to restoring a sense of civilized community to the travel experience. The Northwind offers two levels of service: Summit and Panorama. Both begin and end in the dome cars.
The more expensive Summit service offers a higher level of hotel accommodation during stopovers in Whistler and 100 Mile House (both in B.C.) and exclusive use of the train's Summit club car. Meal service is also provided in the first-class Summit dining car. Panorama passengers are served at their dome car seats.
The Northwind menus feature local ingredients. Salmon, for example, on the initial 119-kilometre North Vancouver-to-Whistler leg; fresh produce, perhaps, from the Pemberton area at the outset of the 298-kilometre day two; beef and other Cariboo country staples on day three's 327-kilometre leg. Portions are small but quality and presentation are good.
Other train amenities are of uniformly high quality, from the linen and silverware table settings to the comfortable high-backed seats in the dome car and the lounge car armchairs.
The ride is Cadillac smooth, with a leisurely cruising speed of 32-40 km/h. Add in strains of Enya over the sound system and absolute tranquillity approaches. Bags, once checked in at the station, move seamlessly from train to hotel rooms and back. Staff service is courteous and obliging.
The scenery is spectacular and ever-changing. The train starts at sea-level in the fiord-like Howe Sound rain forest, heads to 608 metres above the Fraser River, then travels through high Cariboo country.
Veteran rail travellers prefer to view it in the open air by stepping out through the dutch doors on either side of the dome coach's vestibule. There's no better place to take in the arid majesty of the Fraser Canyon.
Historical highlights are provided in running commentaries from Northwind attendants. Sometimes too much; sometimes too little.
Overnight stays in Whistler and 100 Mile House allow a combination of daylight sightseeing from the train with such late afternoon and evening activities as horseback riding and mountain helicopter tours.
When: The Northwind is scheduled to run weekly through October.
Cost: Northbound trips are three-day, two-night affairs; prices run from $900 a person up to $1,375. Southbound land cruises are two-day, one-night trips. Ticket prices range from $600 to $1,100.
Other BC Rail trips: Cariboo Prospector trips link North Vancouver with Squamish, Whistler and Lillooet. The Royal Hudson steam train makes day trips between North Vancouver and Squamish.
Contact: (800) 663-8238; (604) 986-2012; (604) 984-5246; http://www.bcrail.com; e-mail: passinfo@bcrail.com. Rocky Mountaineer Railtours Credit for reviving luxury train travel in Western Canada must go to Rocky Mountaineer Railtours. The company took over the Rocky Mountaineer Canadian Rockies service from Crown-owned Via Rail in March, 1990. Via had started the service two years earlier but its enthusiasm soon waned, and the Rockies route was tendered to the private sector. Rocky Mountaineer started with approximately 11,000 passengers in its first year; that number has increased by close to 700 per cent over the past 10 years. Last year, its annual customer total hit 75,000. Rocky Mountaineer Railtours is now the largest privately owned passenger rail operator in North America.
Its two-day, all-daylight rail adventure, which runs between Vancouver, Jasper or Banff and Calgary, follows a historic route built over 100 years ago through Western Canada and the Canadian Rockies.
Last year, the company pushed the opening of its season back to April from May; this year its fleet of GoldLeaf Service dome cars has been increased to 10 from eight with the addition of two new $3.4-million dome coaches. Rocky Mountaineer Railtours has twice been voted one of the 20 best rail experiences in the world by the International Railway Traveler.
When: Mid-April to mid-October. Winter tours are also available.
Cost: Spring rates for the two-day GoldLeaf tour start at $990 a person based on double occupancy.
Contact: Rocky Mountaineer Railtours (800) 665-7245. Web site: http://www.rockymountaineer.com. Epicurean Adventure Train Launched in late 2000, the three-day Epicurean Adventure Train (EAT) trip is a joint venture of the Oak Bay Beach Hotel & Marine Resort in Victoria, the Aerie Resort, (a 50-minute rail trip to the north), and Vancouver Island's E&N Railway. Starting from the Oak Bay hotel, the train travels through Vancouver Island's Malahat Mountains to the Aerie. The trip includes opportunities for kayaking, astronomy, dining and foraging for wild mushrooms.
When: Runs monthly all year round.
Cost: The package starts at $764 a person and is based on double occupancy. The train portion of the trip starts at $349 a person.
Contact: Call the Oak Bay Beach Hotel & Marine Resort at (800) 668-7758.
Via Rail Canada The Crown corporation has been promoting romantic rail trips since the early 1990s. Its Silver and Blue class service rolls travellers in luxury across the country in 1950s-vintage art deco rail coaches. Add in, for good measure, Panorama cars, sophisticated culinary options, fluffy pillows and breathtaking scenery.
For the past two years Via has also been providing peak season Romance By Rail packages on its Vancouver-Toronto, Montreal-Toronto and Montreal-Halifax routes. The service offers passengers en suite double bedrooms with queen-size beds, down duvets, daily freshly cut flowers in rooms, chilled champagne and breakfast in bed.
Optimum scenic romance comes with Via's Skeena service from Jasper on the east side of the Rockies through the Skeena and Bulkley valleys to Prince Rupert on B.C.'s coast.
On the East Coast, Via offers its first-class Bras D'Or. The relatively short land cruise runs between Sydney and Halifax, N.S. The June 5 to Oct. 17 service departs from Halifax on Tuesday mornings and arrives in Sydney in the late afternoon. Departures from Sydney are on Wednesday mornings and include a one-hour stop at Port Hawkesbury.
When: Departure times vary.
Cost: Silver and Blue service starts at around $1,100 and heads upwards of $1,700 a person; Skeena service starts at around $150 a person. Totem class, which includes all meals, goes for around $400; Bras D'Or tickets are $219.
Contact: (888) VIARAIL; (888) 842-7245; http://www.viarail.ca. Royal Canadian Pacific Operated by the Canadian Pacific Railway, this vintage train is now into its second season offering a six-day, five-night excursion of the Golden/Crowsnest Pass loop with departure from Calgary. The 1,046-kilometre journey takes passengers through the Canadian Rockies via Banff, then through the Columbia River Valley and back to Calgary via the Crowsnest Pass and Lethbridge. The Royal consists of up to eight historic rail cars built in the early 1900s.
When: From May to October.
Cost: All-inclusive Golden/Crowsnest Excursion: $6,989 a person based on double occupancy. Other package tours range from $3,887 for the Royal Clubhouse Golf Excursion to $5,998 for the Rare Mileage Tour.
Contact: (877) 665-3044; Royal Canadian Pacific Web site http://www.cprtours.com. American Orient Express The Great Trans-Canada Rail Journey is a 10-day/nine-night luxury excursion that starts in Vancouver, travels east through Kamloops and on to Jasper, Saskatoon, Winnipeg and Thunder Bay before continuing across Ontario and the Canadian Shield to Ottawa and Montreal.
When: Vancouver to Montreal July 14 to 23, Aug. 1-10; Montreal to Vancouver July 23 to Aug. 1, Aug. 10-19.
Cost: From $6,683 to $11,357.
Contact: (800) 320-4206; http://www.americanorientexpress.com.
John Steel Rail Tours The company organizes approximately two dozen independent and guided rail tours from B.C. to the Maritimes and points in between. Independent tours range from the five-day Best of the Rockies Circle Tour and the seven-day Heart of Canada to the seven-day Eastern Canada Explorer and the six-day Nova Scotia Treasures.
Guided tours include the five-day Mystery Tour; the 14-day Fire and Gold Eastern Canada Fall Colours and the seven-day Ghost Towns and Gold Dust Kootenays Explorer.
When: Independent tours run from June 1 to Sept. 30; guided tours run from January through December.
Cost: Prices start at $759 a person.
Contact: (800) 988-5778; fax (604) 886-2100; e-mail: info@johnsteel.com.

