The main thrust of Montreal's wood-burning bylaw is set to kick in later this year, and the question is: will it work to reduce air pollution or was it just a public relations exercise?
The city seems to be counting on awareness campaigns to try to gently persuade tens of thousands of Montreal households to either stop burning wood or invest in new, low-emission wood stoves or fireplace inserts. Some of the bylaw's restrictions have been in effect since it was passed over two years ago, but so far, not a single fine has been issued.
Since August 2015, it has been illegal to burn wood during smog alerts in the city of Montreal or to install new wood-burning appliances that do not meet the strict new emissions standards( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-presents-new-bylaw-on-wood-burning-stoves-and-fireplaces ). But the most important restriction kicks in on Oct. 1, 2018. After that date, if you burn wood in Montreal in any appliance that emits more than 2.5 grams of fine particles per hour - and any stove or fireplace purchased before 2009 almost certainly does - you will be liable to a fine of $100 to $500 on first offence, $500 to $1,000 on second offence, and $1,000 to $2,000 on any subsequent offence.
The bylaw was designed to crack down on the problem gradually, starting with the smog-day ban, but giving homeowners three years of lead time to comply before the full ban kicked in. According to some local stove and fireplace retailers, business is gradually picking up as the deadline approaches, but so far there is no sign of a mad rush to convert.
"We've already got the first two weeks of January booked for installations and estimates," said Connie Romeo, manager of Foyers Lambert( http://foyerlambert.com/home-3/ ) in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce. "We see people are starting now to really wake up and say, 'Okay, now it's crunch time, I don't want to wait until September when it's too close to the deadline.' I would say they are slowly, slowly starting to wake up and say, 'Okay we've got to do this now'."
Converting is not cheap. A cast iron wood-burning stove that meets the new norms costs between $3,000 and $4,000, plus several hundred more for installation. Metal stoves are slightly cheaper - $2,000 to $3,000. An insert that converts an existing fireplace to meet the norms costs between $3,000 and $5,000, plus $1,000 to $1,600 for installation, depending on the height of the chimney.
Romeo said about four out of five of her customers choose to convert from a wood-burning appliance to propane or natural gas, mostly because of the convenience of not having to deal with wood and ash. (Electrical appliances or those that burn propane, natural gas or wood pellets are allowed under the bylaw.)
But among the estimated 50,000 wood-burning appliances across the city are thousands of fireplaces that cannot be easily converted with an insert.
"The problem in Montreal is that a lot of condo builders in the 1980s and '90s put in these pre-fabricated ambient wood fireplaces," said Charles Hamel, co-owner of Poêles et Foyers Rosemont( http://www.poelesetfoyersrosemont.ca ). "They don't give off a lot of heat; they are just for ambiance," but they still pollute, he said.
He sells a prefabricated wood-burning fireplace unit that meets the city's new norms, but it costs about $6,900, he said, plus about $1,000 to remove the old unit and install the new.
Of course, homeowners are free to keep their old, polluting appliances, but as of next fall it will be illegal to use them, except during power outages of more than three hours. That exemption was good news for some Montrealers who cling to their wood-burning appliance just in case something similar to the 1998 ice storm happens again( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/20-years-after-the-ice-storm-with-more-extreme-weather-expected-are-we-ready ).
The bylaw, ushered in by the administration of former mayor Denis Coderre, is among the strictest in the world, but critics wonder whether it can really work to improve air quality without a rigorous enforcement program and a generous rebate offer.
"We agree with the bylaw, and we supported it," said André Bélisle, president of the Association québécoise de lutte contre la pollution atmosphérique, "except that we warned the city ... that it is useless to have a bylaw, no matter how strict it is, if we are not able to enforce it."
Poeles et Foyers Rosemont co-owner Charles Hamel checks out a new wood stove that has an emission rate of 2.5 gph.
The city already knows where most wood-burning appliances are because of municipal evaluations, but homeowners are required, according to the new bylaw, to declare their wood-burning appliance( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montrealers-slow-to-declare-their-fireplaces-and-wood-burning-stoves ) by filling out an online form( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/pls/portal/docs/PAGE/ENVIRO_FR/MEDIA/DOCUMENTS/FORMULAIRE_ANNEXE_EN.PDF ).
Enforcement of the "no wood burning during smog alerts" rule has been weak so far. Since the bylaw came into force, there have been at least two dozen smog days in the Montreal area and the city's environment department received about a dozen complaints about wood smoke during a recent smog alert. But so far, not a single fine has been issued, the Gazette has learned.
The environment department only has eight inspectors on the payroll, and they are responsible for applying all of the city's environmental bylaws, from water issues to air pollution to industrial activities.
"The enforcement strategy is based more on information and public awareness than on coercion," said Gabrielle Fontaine-Giroux, a city spokesperson.
This fall, for example, the city sent out information flyers to 30,000 owners of wood-burning appliances to remind them of the bylaw and why it's important to respect it. Information was also sent out by the 19 boroughs via newsletters, the city's website and the métro's info screens.
Many think of wood smoke as natural and harmless, and associate it with outdoorsy, healthy living. But scientists have been sounding the alarm bells for years now about how dangerous wood smoke is to human health.
Wood smoke, like cigarette smoke, contains hundreds of pollutants, including benzene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acrolein and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Fine particles are of greatest concern, as they can remain in the lungs for months, causing changes that can lead to structural damage and diseases.
Smog consists mainly of ground-level ozone and particulate matter and the main sources for these pollutants in Montreal are vehicle usage and wood burning. Environment Canada issues smog alerts( https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/info-smog.html ) on days when air pollutant concentrations are likely to reach levels deemed harmful to human health. The most recent alert for Montreal was Dec. 30. Smog contributes to thousands of premature deaths across Canada, as well as countless emergency hospital visits and lost days of work and school due to asthma attacks and other respiratory ailments.
"We know those fine particles can go deep down into the lungs and into the bloodstream and have negative health effects," said Karine Price, a toxicologist with Montreal's public health department. "The World Health Organization has classified fine particles as cancer-causing."
Children, the elderly, and people with respiratory or cardiac diseases are more sensitive to these fine particles. Conditions like asthma and bronchitis can be caused or exacerbated through exposure to wood smoke.
"Fine particles are deemed to cause cancer," Price said. "There is no safe level. The best thing is to reduce where we can."
Wood smoke contributes 39 per cent of the fine particles in the atmosphere in the Montreal region, while transportation accounts for 45 per cent.
Still, some, including Bélisle, thought Montreal went too far( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/environmental-group-says-montreals-wood-burning-bylaw-too-strict ) when it adopted a norm that was even stricter than the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's new norm of 4.5 grams per hour.
He said there are more fireplace and stove models on the market that meet the slightly looser U.S. regulations, so prices are better, and the difference between 4.5 and 2.5, in the end, is insignificant when one considers the amount of pollution emitted by older stoves and fireplaces, often 50 grams per hour or more.
He urged the city and province to work quickly together to offer a rebate program to encourage homeowners to convert to cleaner-burning appliances. His organization ran a pilot project in 2012 that managed to get 5,300 polluting appliances replaced in just one year by offering homeowner rebates on cleaner models.
If you have questions about the bylaw, send them to environnement@ville.montreal.qc.ca,( mailto:environnement@ville.montreal.qc.ca ) call 514-280-4326 or go to the city's website( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7418,76005736&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL&t=1 ). Those who smell or see smoke coming from a chimney during a smog alert can call the city's environment department at 514-280-4330. You can receive Twitter alerts by following ECAlertezQC147( https://twitter.com/ECAlertQC147 ).
mlalonde@postmedia.com( mailto:mlalonde@postmedia.com )
Related
Montreal presents stricter bylaw on wood-burning stoves and fireplaces( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-presents-new-bylaw-on-wood-burning-stoves-and-fireplaces )
Environmental group says proposed wood-burning bylaw is too strict( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/environmental-group-says-montreals-wood-burning-bylaw-too-strict )
Montrealers slow to declare their fireplaces and wood-burning stoves( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montrealers-slow-to-declare-their-fireplaces-and-wood-burning-stoves )
CREDIT: Michelle Lalonde, Montreal Gazette

