There may have been an "accumulation of irregularities," but there was no fraud in the sale of the city-owned Faubourg Contrecoeur, a lawyer representing Frank Zampino, the former no. 2 politician at Montreal city hall, said in closing arguments at his trial on Friday.
Zampino's lawyer, Isabel Schurman, and Pierre L'Écuyer, who is defending co-accused businessman Paolo Catania and who also presented final arguments, maintained that the investigation by Quebec's anti-corruption squad into the 2007 Contrecoeur land deal was prompted by a "media storm" over the sale price that began with news articles in 2008.
"A journalist wrote a story about Mr. Zampino and UPAC took that story and tried to prove it true," Schurman said in describing the defence's theory to the court. "However, it isn't true, she said.
There is also no evidence of personal gain on the part of Zampino, Schurman added.
Zampino, Catania and four former executives of Catania's construction firm, Construction Frank Catania et Associés Inc., were arrested in 2012 in connection with the sale of the city-owned land known as Faubourg Contrecoeur( http://montrealgazette.com/?s=Contrecoeur ) to the firm at a discounted price.
The trial before Court of Quebec Judge Yvan Poulin began in February 2016 and is hearing final arguments this week and next week.
The city's real-estate agency, Société d'habitation et de développement de Montréal (SHDM), discounted $14.7 million for decontamination and other costs from the $19.1-million winning bid submitted by Construction Frank Catania et Associés. The firm wound up paying $4.4 million to purchase the land in the east end of Montreal to build a housing project valued at $300 million.
Among other things, the prosecution has tried to show at the trial that Construction Frank Catania et Associés was included in private discussions with the SHDM's consultants to prepare studies and estimates for developing the Contrecoeur site, which gave it information that its competitors didn't have when a call for proposals was launched.
In their final arguments, Schurman and L'Écuyer argued the prosecution's case rests on circumstantial evidence that doesn't prove criminal acts were committed. The defence refuted that evidence and called into question the credibility of some key prosecution witnesses.
Schurman downplayed the significance of trips taken by Zampino and Catania and their spouses around the time of the Contrecoeur land deal. The defence maintains the trips weren't connected to the Contrecoeur sale. Schurman argued that Zampino paid his way and that Catania merely reserved hotel rooms for the two couples on his credit card for one of the trips.
At the time of the Contrecoeur sale, and before the Charbonneau commission hearings, politicians didn't see a problem with accepting tickets to events and bottles of wine from entrepreneurs doing business with the city because the norms at the time didn't forbid it, Schurman said.
Zampino testified in his defence during the trial that he was faithful to his own moral compass in the absence of an ethics code for elected officials at the time, she added.
"Socializing is not criminal and even taking trips isn't criminal," Schurman said.
Poulin at one point acknowledged that the key issue in the case is whether the accused showed poor judgment or whether any criminal acts were committed.
The prosecution is expected to begin its final arguments on Friday afternoon after the lawyers for the remaining defendants.
lgyulai@postmedia.com( mailto:lgyulai@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/CityHallReport( https://twitter.com/CityHallReport )
CREDIT: Linda Gyulai, Montreal Gazette

