Some municipal officials were relieved, while others were deluged with calls Tuesday after Quebec released an updated map showing areas at risk of flooding.
The map shows "special intervention zones"( https://www.cehq.gouv.qc.ca/zones-inond/ZIS-20190715/index.html ) that affect 783 Quebec municipalities, 30 less than a previous map released last month. The at-risk zones in the revamped map, the result of public consultations with more than 5,600 people, aerial photographs and field surveys, are coloured in purple.
The purple areas cover less ground in the new map than the previous map, but at-risk zones in West Quebec still cover swaths of land on the Ottawa River from the Ontario-Quebec border near Hawkesbury in the east to L'Isle-Aux-Allumettes, near Pembroke, as well as much of the Gatineau River almost as far north as Low.
According to the decree released on the Gazette Officielle du Québec, rebuilding homes or building new ones in the areas destroyed by a flood in 2017 or 2019 will not be permitted. Residences can only be rebuilt where damage does not exceed 50 per cent of the new cost, which will be determined by municipalities.
There are 1,036 properties with buildings in the Gatineau portion of the map, said Coun. Myriam Nadeau, who represents the Pointe-Gatineau district, the most heavily affected by flooding. There are another 1,818 Gatineau properties without buildings on the map.
Nadeau said about a half-dozen homes in her ward that were in the previous map are not on the new map, thanks to topographic information the city of Gatineau provided to the province.
"I'm happy that the new decree took into account the expertise of the city of Gatineau," she said. "I'm not saying there may not be some further adjustments."
Municipalities have been scrambling not only with the aftermath of this year's flooding, but to also respond to residents who say their homes or cottages are in areas that have never been flooded - and want a reassessment.
"It's definitely added to the pressure we've had since the beginning of the flood," said Nadeau. "It takes away some of the manpower to do other things."
In April, Quebec Premier François Legault announced that Quebec will offer a lifetime maximum of $100,000 to any home damaged by flooding. The alternative for homeowners is to accept $200,000 to move and allow their home to be demolished.
Nadeau said 89 homes have already been demolished in Pointe-Gatineau because of the 2017 flooding. It's unclear how many will be demolished due to this year's flood.
Yann Jodoin has owned a rental property on Boulevard Hurtubise, across the street from the water side, since 2012. The house was damaged in the 2017 flood, and he spent about $85,000 to renovate it, with about half of that covered by provincial compensation. The house was damaged by floods again in May.
"This time we said we're not doing anything. It's not that we're giving up, but the program changed," said Jodoin, who may also qualify for $50,000 for the land.
"If we lose the rental, the bank won't come after us. And we're not stuck with a worthless piece of land," he said. "I have no feelings for the house. It was just an investment. It's my house, it's not my home."
But Jodoin also reflects that if many property owners walk away, municipalities will have to contend with reduced tax revenue and empty lots. "It's going to be weird. I don't know how they'll manage all those empty lots."
Joanne Labadie, mayor of Pontiac, which includes 47 kilometres of Ottawa River waterfront west of Gatineau, said one piece of land Pontiac requested for reconsideration is off the new map. However, there are three other areas - including a portion of the village of Quyon - that have never been flooded and remain on the map.
The municipality has about 6,000 permanent residents and between 300 and 250 cottages. After the 2017 flood, Pontiac lost 29 permanent residents and "countless" cottagers, she said. "We have no way to follow up on which cottages have been abandoned. It's just a matter of time before they collapse, or they are seized for non-payment of taxes."
The municipality had to raise taxes and implement an unpopular business tax. The loss of cottagers is a loss to the local economy, said Labadie.
"Local businesses count on cottagers. Rural municipalities depend on taxes."
Labadie points out that in order for full-time resident to get $200,000 for their house and $50,000 for their land, the property has to sustain 50 per cent damage. "If you have a $700,000 house, $200,000 is not enough to motivate you to leave."
This is why she fears the next flood. People who have no security or insurance will risk their lives and the lives of first responders to save their homes, she said. "We just don't have the budget to help them. They (the province) are downloading the problem on municipalities."
Winston Sunstrum, mayor of L'Isle-Aux-Allumettes, a 230-square-kilometre island on the Ottawa River, said he was deluged with calls Tuesday morning after the new map was released.
"There are still a lot of errors on the new map," he said. "Sections of our municipality that didn't flood in 2017 or 2019 are still on the map. The phone has been ringing off the wall."
Quebec will release another map in December. Residents have until Aug. 19 to recommend further modifications( https://www.mamh.gouv.qc.ca/fileadmin/publications/ministere/inondations_printanieres_2019/formulaire_zis.pdf ) to the map. When Legault announced his flooding action plan, he said his team has two mandates - to ensure that compensation happens quicker and to prepare municipalities for the 2020 round of floods.
But Sunstrum believes the entire process has been rushed. His municipality, which has 1,400 permanent residents and about 2,000 cottagers, has only two employees who are qualified to make assessments for the province in response to appeals for modifications. Waterfront properties account for almost two-thirds of tax assessment.
"The 2017 flood had an impact on so many properties. The 2019 flood added more properties. This flood zone (map) added a whole lot more properties," he said.
Tim Wilkinson has owned a cottage on the island for the past 10 years and still has a mortgage on the property. He fears he won't be able to sell his property or even do regular maintenance. As a cottage owner, he doesn't qualify for a buyout because it's not a primary residence.
"I have to continue to pay for a property that I can't sell," he said. "I am so stressed out. I lost 14 pounds, and I can't sleep at night."
jlaucius@postmedia.com( mailto:jlaucius@postmedia.com )
The Montreal Gazette contributed to this report
ALSO IN THE NEWS:
Egan: Bill Luxton was an Ottawa television pioneer( https://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-news/egan-bill-luxton-was-an-ottawa-television-pioneer )
Sentencing hearing delayed for woman who threatened MPP Lisa MacLeod( https://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-news/sentencing-hearing-delayed-for-woman-who-threatened-mpp-lisa-macleod )
Child burned by wild parsnip as infestation spreads( https://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-news/child-burned-by-wild-parsnip-as-infestation-spreads )

