Tens of thousands of Quebecers found themselves on Wednesday morning with heat, light and electric power after spending more than a day without any of it( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hydro-outages-leave-more-than-240000-in-the-dark-in-laval-laurentians ) as Hydro-Québec repair crews continued to repair the damage done to its power grid Monday by freezing rain and high winds.
As of 10 a.m., the utility reported( http://pannes.hydroquebec.com/pannes/bilan-interruptions-service/#bis ) a little more than 108,000 homes and businesses without power and in the dark - including 39,354 in the Lanaudière region, 39,599 in the Laurentians and 28,476 in Laval (28,476) - in the wake of a series of freezing rain showers and high winds that at, its height, left 313,000 clients in the dark.
But even though Hydro-Québec hopes to have nearly all of its clients back in the network sometime Wednesday, the utility, which has deployed 500 repair crews in the region, warned that some zones further from urban centres might have to wait until Thursday before the grid was completely operational.
Despite the fact nearly 30,000 clients were still without power in Laval, overnight repairs succeeded in returning 60,000 homes and businesses - as well as the city's police station - to the grid.
Officials in Laval said Tuesday that police were patrolling the city as phone service was down in some neighbourhoods. Sylvain Gariepy, operations chief for the Laval fire department, said firefighters went door-to-door to check on seniors and other vulnerable people.
Laval Mayor Marc Demers urged families and neighbours to look out for one another. "If you have members of your family - parents, brothers, sisters - who are in a zone that's lacking electricity, check in on their situation to make sure we're not forgetting someone in distress," Demers said.
Gariepy warned people of the dangers of carbon monoxide poisoning from barbecues and generators. Four adults and five children were taken to hospital in three separate cases after using barbecues indoors or having generators too close to their homes.
Firefighters reported high levels of carbon monoxide in the homes in each case, but no major injuries were reported.
"Another family was taken to the hospital today - three children and a mother," Gariepy said Tuesday afternoon. "The problem we're dealing with is people are putting barbecues in their house to heat or eat, they're using propane stoves or putting generators too close to the house."
The city of Laval opened up two community centres for residents needing a place to stay warm, charge phones or have a shower. About 130 people were staying at the two temporary shelters.
Despite that progress the Commission scolaire de Laval (CSDL) said its elementary and secondary schools would remain closed on Wednesday, although some professional training centres would remain open.
The Commission scolaire des Affluents in the Lanaudière will also keep its schools closed on Wednesday.
The Sûreté du Québec reported that Tuesday night's snow flurries caused several vehicles to skid off the road but no serious injuries were reported.
On westbound Highway 30 near St-Constant, nine vehicles - two tractor trailers, a cement mixer and six cars - were involved in a chain collision that saw six person taken to hospital with minor injuries.
Related
Hydro-Québec outages: 'I saw the transformer on my street explode'( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hydro-outages-leave-more-than-240000-in-the-dark-in-laval-laurentians )
Montreal weather: A little more like spring today( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-a-little-more-like-spring )
Carbon monoxide poisoning: What is it and how can it be prevented?( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/carbon-monoxide-poisoning-what-is-it-and-how-can-it-be-prevented )

