The June hay harvest at Marcel Groleau's dairy and cattle farm in Thetford Mines was 40 per cent smaller than usual due to a lack of rain, putting him in the rare and financially undesirable position of having to buy hay to feed his 350 cows.
With dry conditions through June and July and higher gas prices inflating transportation costs, hay prices doubled in many regions of Quebec. Meanwhile, productivity declined as his overheated herds dozed more and ate less. Prolonged heat waves led to increased mortality rates on his farm.
"Animals that are more fragile suffer in the heat, just as humans do," said Groleau, who is also president of the Union des producteurs agricoles, Quebec's farmers union, which represents 42,000 producers. "Because of the heat we had starting early in June, we saw a lot of that effect. I think it was one of the worst seasons on record."
Quebec's hot, dry summer has plagued many of the province's farmers, particularly those who raise cattle, pigs, sheep and other animals who rely on hay, Groleau noted. Many reported hay harvests that were 60 or 70 per cent below average, forcing them to buy at high prices. Those without the financial liquidity to spend thousands on feed could be forced to stop production, and potentially go under, Groleau said. Roughly 80 per cent of farmers in the province are covered by crop insurance, but it remains to be seen if coverage will be sufficient. Growers of crops like cauliflower, broccoli, kale and romaine lettuce were hit hard as well, forcing food merchants to import the produce.
Strawberry and raspberry crops were relatively robust and above average in quality. But high temperatures caused them to ripen quickly, and with manpower shortages on many farms, much of the crop rotted before it could be harvested. Scorching temperatures kept many away from pick-your-own establishments.
At Quinn Farm on Île-Perrot, just off the western tip of the island of Montreal, the strawberry crop was strong, but attendance was not.
"The crowds weren't there, due to the extreme heat - they weren't coming out to pick," said farm general manager Gabrielle Dumas. "On Canada Day weekend, almost no one showed up. Normally we have thousands of people."
Much of the strawberry crop was sold instead at market, or made into jam.
Owner Phil Quinn estimated he had lost $100,000 in you-pick revenues by mid-July. The farm's 35-million-litre irrigation pond was nearly dried up, forcing owners to spend $50,000 on additional irrigation infrastructure, including a new well. The farm had to irrigate apple orchards it had never had to water since the farm opened in the 1980s.
Environment Canada said July was the hottest recorded in Montreal in 97 years, but not the driest. The island received 97 millimetres of rain, which is eight millimetres above average. Most of it fell within the space of three days.
The Montreal and southern Quebec regions fared relatively well compared to the hardest-hit spots in the north and eastern areas of the province. The regions of Bas-Saint-Laurent, Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean and Abitibi were the most affected by drought.
Things have improved since July, with more rainfall in August. Corn crops are looking full, although there is worry that ears may be smaller than usual.
The farmers union is in talks with the provincial government to ensure hard-hit farmers will receive financial compensation.
"We are well aware of the difficulties agricultural producers are experiencing due to dry conditions," said Christine Harvey, press attaché for Agriculture Minister Laurent Lessard. "We are therefore working actively with the Financière agricole (the Quebec body that organizes insurance and financial aid for farmers) to intervene rapidly with programs already in place, notably crop insurance."
Quebec's growing season for vegetables and fruits has lengthened by 20 days a year since the 1970s due to global warming, noted Groleau, and extended the growing territory of some crops like corn all the way northward to Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean.
At Quinn Farm, Dumas said the blueberry crop is looking strong and is ready for picking, as is sweet corn. In a sign of the summer's imminent demise, apple picking begins on Aug. 18.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( https://twitter.com/ReneBruemmer?lang=en )
Jake O'Brady with an ear of corn that he picked at Quinn Farm on Île Perrot on Aug. 10, 2018. Farmers are suffering hardships due to the dry, hot summer.
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette

