Kaloyan Gueorguiev prefers not to dwell on the past, particularly that day 10 years ago when he was shot in the face walking up the stairs to the fourth floor of Dawson College.
"The doctor told me I was really lucky in my bad luck," says Gueorguiev, who was 19 at the time and is now a master's student in industrial engineering at McGill. If the bullet, which lodged in his brow, had hit him a little lower or a little higher, he would have lost an eye, or his life.
"But life is too short to be pissed off all the time."
It's when another attack happens, however -- for instance, the one in July in Nice -- that he looks at the scars on his face and forearm, where he was also shot, and is forced to think about it.
To think about Anastasia De Sousa, the bright-eyed first-year student who was shot nine times and died in the school cafeteria -- she would be 28 today; the other 15 people who were cut down, like him, by bullets in the legs, arms or head as students ran and screamed in panic through the atrium; and Kimveer Gill, the black-clad 25-year-old from Fabreville who fired 72 bullets with his semi-automatic rifle before shooting himself, just after 12:45 p.m.
He had hundreds of extra bullets in his bag.
"There's a reason why they are called assault rifles and not protect rifles," Gueorguiev says, borrowing a line from an Australian comedian about the need for gun control. "But in Nice it was a guy with a truck (who barrelled through a crowd). ... What was going through his head? What went through (Gill's) head to do what he did? His rifle was just a tool. I wish people would pay more attention to mental health issues."
Gun control amid more school shootings
In the 10 years since the Dawson shooting, there have been a handful of school shootings in Canada, most recently in La Loche, Sask., where two people were killed and seven injured. (Another two students were killed in their home.)
In the U.S., since the Sandy Hook shooting in 2012, there have been another 10 incidents at schools in which the shooter intended to commit mass murder.
At the same time, gun control in both countries has faltered.
In Canada, the long-gun registry set up after the Polytechnique massacre in 1989 was abolished by the Harper government -- with all records, including those from Quebec, ordered destroyed by the Supreme Court in March 2015.
In June, a bill was passed in the National Assembly to establish a new Quebec-only registry, to be set up by 2018.
Anastasia De Sousa's mother, Louise, who joined the gun-control lobby group Poly se souvient, was in Quebec City to witness the adoption of Bill 64, alongside mothers of victims in the Polytechnique massacre.
But the gun Kimveer Gill used, a semi-automatic Beretta CX-4 Storm, is still available, and in fact more accessible than ever, The Canadian Press has reported.
At the time of the shooting, it was a restricted weapon, which required a special licence to own and another licence to transport, and could only be used in shooting clubs. A slightly modified version of the gun made for the Canadian market means it's not restricted; only a regular licence is needed to buy it.
"It's crazy! It's ridiculous! C'mon, it's more accessible than ever!" cries Richard Filion, the director general of Dawson College. "Something has gone wrong and no one seems to understand how to fix it. We're not in the U.S. here -- we're in Canada."
Still, Filion and the larger Dawson community have concentrated their efforts over the last decade not on gun control, but on promoting peace -- inner and outer peace -- to prevent another school shooting from taking place.
Peace at Dawson
Filion remembers running toward the sound of gunfire that day. It was a scene of pure chaos, he says. The school was closed to students for five days.
During that time, Filion sat in his office working on a plan.
More surveillance cameras were installed, more security guards were hired and, as has happened at other institutions, Dawson began to conduct regular lockdown drills.
But the school has also hired more psychologists, and paid more attention to students in need, Filion says.
Gill was not a student at Dawson. But from his writings, he appeared to be anti-social and/or depressed -- and full of hate. A McGill study revealed in 2010 that 30 per cent of Dawson students and employees on campus at the time of the shooting suffered from a psychological disorder -- including post-traumatic stress disorder and major depression.
"Right from the beginning, it was clear in my mind that whatever plan we have, we will never be in a position to neutralize an active shooter," Filion says. "We have to prevent (violence) through education."
The CEGEP now offers a Peace Studies certificate, with courses on everything from world religions to social deviance to art history.
Five years ago it planted a peace garden, which has flourished from a staid memorial into a living memorial into an outdoor classroom and place of healing, with one of three interlocking gardens named for Anastasia.
(An almond tree donated for Anastasia by the Montreal police was not doing well on campus, so it went to the De Sousas' home, and is now flourishing.)
At that time, Dawson students also started building a virtual Peace Wall, receiving messages from around the world. To mark the 10th anniversary of the shooting, the project has been revitalized in the hope of reaching 10,000 messages.
So far it has received 1,335 messages from 77 countries.
During this Peace Week, until Sept. 21, the CEGEP is hosting events with two speakers: Samantha Nutt of War Child Canada, who has spent 16 years in war zones treating the wounded as a physician, and Abdennour Bidar, a philosopher and essayist, whose message is one of hope for a society in which everyone shares common values while respecting their differences in culture, beliefs and identity.
(Bidar -- whose Open Letter to the Muslim World, written after the Charlie Hebdo shooting, was read by millions of people -- will also be speaking at other CEGEPs, including Collège de Rosemont and Collège de Maisonneuve, where a number of youths were enrolled before leaving to join extremist groups in the Middle East.)
"For me, whether it's a guy jumping in a truck and driving through a crowd in Nice or those leaving Quebec to join the jihad or someone in the U.S. attacking a school, it's the same situation," Filion says. "It's a desperation in life that pushes them to an evil fate. So how do we make it so that we can equip those people who might be more vulnerable? It's through education."
Peace week begins Tuesday, with a special ceremony at Dawson attended by survivors, police and representatives from three levels of government, and ends Sept. 21 at city hall.
csolyom@postmedia.com
CREDIT: Catherine Solyom Montreal Gazette

