It's the kind of headache any National Hockey League goaltending coach would love to have.
Montreal Canadiens head coach Guy Carbonneau has said he wants to work goalies David Aebischer and Cristobal Huet in rotation. The idea is the make sure neither one goes cold from idleness. What he's wound up with is a case of hot and hotter, as the two netminders engaged in one-upmanship this week.
Aebischer had an admirable and acrobatic 47-save performance in a shootout loss against the Toronto Maple Leafs last Saturday, then came back undaunted for a 31-save win against the Ottawa Senators Tuesday. But Carbonneau, rather than anointing a No.1 goalie, decided to star Huet Thursday night against the Carolina Hurricanes on the road. Huet merely responded with his 12th shutout performance in the NHL, 4-0, and his eighth shutout in only 42 games with the Canadiens.
At the end of October, Carbonneau said he'd eventually go with a system of a No. 1 goalie and backup, but this week's events haven't done anything to settle the issue. Carbonneau said he talks every day with goalie coach Roland Melanson about how his keepers are performing and practicing. Neither is willing to give ground. They've both been showing up on the ice a half hour before practice to do extra work. Aebischer has marginally better statistics, with a 4-1 record and .924 saves percentage and 2.60 goals against average. Huet now has a record of 3-1-2 this season with a 2.45 goals against average and saves percentage of .917.
Don't suggest to Carbonneau that there are too many Europeans in the NHL. Aebischer, 28, was born in Fribourg, Switzerland. He won a world junior bronze for the Swiss in 1998 and backed up Patrick Roy in Colorado's 2001 Stanley Cup season. Huet, 31, was born in Saint-Martin-d'Heres, France and has played in two Olympics for the French before being Jose Theodore's understudy in Montreal.
Though Huet may come to be known as the best French hockey player in history, his heart is in backstopping the Canadiens.
"I can't forget what Cristobal did last season against Carolina," Carbonneau said of Huet's playoff work. "That's one of the reasons we're keeping to our [rotation]schedule."
What he did in Raleigh this week was to shut down the team that bounced Montreal from the Stanley Cup playoffs last season. The Habs were up 2-0 in the series when captain Saku Koivu suffered a sight-threatening eye injury. The steam went out of the Canadiens and the Panthers went on to win the Stanley Cup. Huet wanted to heal that wound. He's always played well against the Hurricanes, both as a Los Angeles King and as a Canadiens. In four regular season games against the 'Canes, he has a 1.56 goals against average.
"It's a good standard to start the year - if we can beat them, it'll let them know that it's not going to be like last year, maybe," Huet said. "But there is no revenge or anything like that. We're just happy to beat a very good team."
The Montreal media will be sure to stoke the goaltending situation as a rivalry. So far, the only fluid spilled is ink, unlike happened in a Florida's goalie rivalry in which Florida's Eddie Belfour reportedly wrestled with Alex Auld and the latter wound up with a gash over his eye.
"We have a good competition and I think the guys are OK with it," said Carbonneau. "They're both competitive guys and they want to play and they'll push each other. Cristobal was strong from the start [against Carolina] He was square to the puck and he didn't give rebounds. That's his game."
Huet's NHL game dates back to 2001 when he was drafted by the Kings in the 7th round. He played 41 games for the Kings in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004. He was traded to the Canadiens in a three-team deal that sent Mathieu Garon to Los Angeles and Radek Bonk from the Ottawa Senators to Montreal. During the lockout, Huet played for Adler Mannhein in the German pro league. He took the team to the finals, but lost four straight games to Eisbären Berlin.
In the 2005-06 season, Huet made his name well known by playing phenomenally, earning seven shutouts, good enough for second in the league even though he played less than half than the number of games leader Miikka Kiprusoff played. His 2.20 goals against average(GAA) was the league's fourth best. Huet won the Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award, the trophy given to the goaltender with the best save percentage, finishing at .929.
His big opportunity came last February. After freezing rain coated Montreal during the 2005-2006 Olympic break, Jose Theodore fell down his outdoor stairs and broke his foot, giving Huet the starting role for the next eight weeks. Theodore's heel took that long to recover, but he never recovered his starting job.

