Transit users in Montreal do not need to fear a reduction in transit choices with the coming of the REM light-rail train line, West Island mayors and the mayor of Montreal said Thursday.
"Everybody needs to calm down and understand what a great opportunity this is for Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue," Mayor Paolo Hawa said. "I have no concerns for Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue or any other routes because the (regional transit planning authority) will be co-ordinating with the STM (Société de Transport de Montréal)."
City officials have been assured that service will be continued on the Vaudreuil-Hudson commuter train line that cuts through the southern sector of the West Island, while the Réseau express métropolitain line will travel further north, near Highway 40.
Mayors were responding to reports( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/proposed-deal-for-rem-would-kill-some-existing-transit-services ) that the REM, the Montreal-area electric commuter train project overseen by the Caisse de dépôt, intends to obtain exclusive rights to serve certain sectors of its planned route that would eliminate some existing transit services and redirect their clientele to its stations. Among the services that could be eliminated are those travelling across the Champlain Bridge and linking Montreal-Trudeau airport with downtown.
The monopoly rights are detailed in a confidential work document obtained by Presse Canadienne and prepared by the Autorité régionale de transport métropolitain (ARTM) - the regional transit authority for the Montreal area - and the corporation overseeing the REM.
The proposed agreement comes to light as the REM project has come under fire, most specifically by the Parti Québécois opposition, which this week announced that if it forms the next government it will scrap the project( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/pq-would-pull-the-plug-on-rem-in-favour-of-trams-express-buses ) in favour of extending the existing transit network.
'Feeder clauses'
The proposed agreement would see the REM take over large territories covered by non-compete clauses to ensure the train's profitability. There would also be "feeder clauses" that would guarantee the ARTM would direct public transit users toward REM stations.
One of the maps detailing the plan depicts a monopoly zone that extends west from Highway 13 to Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue and another in Laval that extends west from Highway 13 to the lower Laurentians.
On the South Shore, the monopoly zone extends south from Highway 116 between Saint-Basile-le Grand and Candiac.
In Montreal, to non-compete zone is contained by St-Laurent Blvd., Jean-Talon St. and Côte-des-Neiges Rd. and extends to the Mont-Saint-Hilaire commuter line and the Bonaventure Expressway.
The working document says the ARTM agrees that "no public transit services (except for handicapped transport) will be offered" within the monopoly zones, between Montreal Island and the South Shore via the Champlain Bridge or between Montreal-Trudeau airport and downtown or the Lionel-Groulx métro station.
Meanwhile, the ARTM also undertakes to direct bus commuters toward REM stations. Beaconsfield Mayor Georges Bourelle noted, however, that it makes sense to recalibrate the bus routes in light of the new rail system coming into place, just as bus routes are reworked when new métro stations are created. Bourelle and Hawa said the ARTM has been in regular contact with affected municipalities to ensure their needs are met.
'I don't see an issue'
"I think we're making a storm in a teapot, I don't see any problems," he said. "Certainly from the West Island perspective, I don't see an issue." Certain bus routes may be eliminated if they are made redundant by the train line, he noted, including the 747 bus route connecting downtown to the airport. "I did not hear in any of our discussions that services will lessened. On the contrary, it will be value added."
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante told reporters Thursday the question of monopoly zones and feeder routes is not set in stone and is worked out with all the parties involved. She invited the corporation managing the REM project to explain the concepts to the public.
The REM is a $6.3-billion Montreal-area commuter train project overseen by the Caisse de dépôt but also financed by the provincial and federal governments as well as Hydro-Québec.
Once completed by 2021 it is expected to extend from Deux-Montagnes to Brossard, serve the West Island, the airport and central Montreal, and possess 26 stations.
Presse Canadienne contributed to this report.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( http://twitter.com/renebruemmer )
Related
Pros and cons of PQ plan to scrap the REM and extend transport network( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/pros-and-cons-of-pq-plan-to-scrap-the-rem-and-extend-transport-network )
West Island Living: How will the REM impact West Island property values?( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/west-island-gazette/west-island-living-how-will-the-rem-impact-west-island-property-values )
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette

