As the sun sets on this lively Spanish city, SIMONA RABINOVITCH finds that physical journeys often inspire spiritual ones
? 'But I don't like beer," I protested vainly as my new Barcelona friends handed me a warm can spontaneously purchased from one of the kind-looking bums hocking the stuff out of duffel bags. The four of us made our way down Las Ramblas, the mile-long pedestrian walkway in the heart of the old city that connects Catalunya Square with the waterfront of Port Vell. Just before four in the morning, the boulevard was still peppered with skaters, tourists, bar-hoppers, junkies and vendors selling flowers, candy and magazines.
"Rock 'n' roll in Barcelona!" joked one of the guys in our motley crew, taunting me to live a little, what the hell. They spoke virtually no English, we spoke no Spanish, but the universal language of liquor, laughter and humanity was enough to cement ties for the evening.
We had met in a shiny, new club near the Port Olímpic called Razzmatazz, recognizing potential new friends through cultural signifiers that transcend nationality: a shared taste in clothes and music; honest eyes, crooked smiles; curiosity.
"Que tal?" one of had them asked. "What's up?" Sipping the cheap but authentic froth, we piled into a cab, then climbed seven flights to the roof of their modest apartment building and stood there, overlooking other rooftops beneath which so many people slept and dreamed.
The vastness was a relief. Although I claimed to be looking for adventure, the truth was I had come to Barcelona in search of something else: an elusive sense of purpose, of history, of self, or some overdue sort of epiphanyto add meaning to life and put it life neatly into perspective.
As devout travellers have long believedsince the beginning of time, a physical journey can perhaps sometimes lead to a spiritual one. And what better maze in which to hunt for revelation -- however clichéd a search this might be by cynical North American standards -- than the dark streets of a strange city? What tormented insomniac hasn't prowled strange cities at night, honoured by the powerful intimacy suddenly shared with foreign soil?
As jet-lagged voyagers can attest, a compelling difference defines the day and night personalities of any living metropolis. At night, a city is cooler, transparent, more sincere. while the masses slumber, oblivious, a city reveals its honest, undressed pulse, from the richness thickening its air to the inspiration lurking in its alleyways.
That is especially true of Barcelona, which tends to wake up after the sun goes down. when the sun goes down. Overcome by afternoon heat, the city shuts down for siesta. Supper doesn't start before 10 or 11 p.m. As revealed during the 1992 Olympics, Barcelona is one of the Mediterranean's most cosmopolitan and culturally dense cities. Renowned for its cuisine, opera, theatre and countless modern bars and old-world cafés, it draws much of its character from the juxtaposition of modernity is juxtaposed with remnants of the city's dramatic history.
Barcelona is also the capital of Catalunya, an autonomous region with its own mysterious language and customs, which came under Spanish rule in 1714. Everywhere are stunning examples -- both functional and aesthetic beautiful -- of late-19th and early-20th-century Modernista architecture, a movement led by brilliant Catalan architect Antonio Gaudí.
At the time of our visit, Barcelona was hosting the 10th edition of the SONAR music and multimedia festival, which attracts thousands of musicians, DJs and fans. Led by our makeshift tour guides, we avoided the massive main events (featuring performances by Björk and Underworld), heading instead to local bars. Most cool Barcelona dives are hidden in a maze of narrow cobblestone streets on either side of Las Ramblas. (The area to the West is called El Raval, while the medieval Gothic Quarter is to the East).
We scampered through alleyways in search of trouble. They took us to Benidorm, a hip hangout playing '80s new wave and Britpop. We sipped from tall glasses at La Macarena and sweated up a storm at the tiny Moog club, where Montreal DJ Tiga shared the decks with Berlin's Miss Kittin and DJ Hell. Just beside the Gothic Quarter is Plaza Real, a hostel and restaurant-lined town square where teenagers hang while couples dine on tapas and wine.
Other must-sees include the Café de l'Opera, where opera-goers congregate after a show, and Els Quatre Gas, a turn-of-the-century artist hangout, whose menu design was reportedly Picasso's first paid commission.The proximity of one spot to another is convenient, especially considering the challenge of snagging a cab. (Maybe that's why the moped seems to be the preferred mode of transport; in the clubs, cute boys carry helmets as casually as women carry purses.) Off the beaten track is after-hours dance club Apolo, which serves past 5 a.m. Good luck finding a taxi at that hour, though.
Hitchhiking is common, though not recommended. Barcelona might be a creative town, but it's also a dangerous one. Dark corners may indeed hold ideas, but they also hide drug addicts and pickpockets -- keep tabs on your wallet. (And, although it's masked by the musky ocean scent, the seedier parts of town smell of urine.)
Night owls not into partying will find action just by roaming around. Take a walk down the Passeig de Gràcia; a vast, magnificent boulevard that houses expensive shops, banks, restaurants, hotels, and some of Gaudí's masterpieces: La Sagrada Familia and La Pedrera (also known as Casa Mila).
True to the Modernista commitment to innovation, the buildings don't have corners so much as curves -- lines that melt together so as to suggest a swirling motion reminiscent of the underwater castles of a child's dreams. At night, the otherworldly sheen cast by wrought-iron street lamps makes the buildings appear even more surreal. Continue down Las Ramblas toward the port, passing such landmarks as the Gran Teatre del Liceu opera house; the Palau Moja classical palace; and Eglisia del Pi, a 15th-century Gothic church. Wherever you go, history echoes beneath your feet. each carved tile becomes a conspirator of time. This density is everywhere, enhancing everything: flavours are stronger, air is thicker, even eye contact seems more intense, loaded with passion, promise and a little bit of pain, as if it's been building up over centuries of anticipation, expectation and regret. Fortunately, darkness forgives such melodrama, allowing me to indulge in thoughts that by day seem contrived.
The sky was already beginning to blush as I reviewed the evening's events. We began in a bar and ended on a rooftop. It had been a good night. As I wondered why similar evenings spent back home in Montreal usually make me cringe with boredom and ache to hop on the next plane to anywhere, the epiphany I had been seeking crept up on me. my spine with a foreboding tingle. Perhaps the joy I felt was really the thrill of the unknown, and my sense of peace was simply a result of the blind trust exchanged between strangers who hadn't yet let each other down.
Unfamiliar surroundings had heightened my emotions. I had forgotten that, despite variations in habit, dialect, temperature and temptation, human nature is the same in all time zones; new scenery gets old fast; and friends who haven't yet disappointed will probably do so sooner or later.
Staring at all those quiet rooftops, I realized that maybe forgetting could be a good thing. Maybe it's this temporary amnesia about rules of conduct and convention and preconceptions about human nature that allows even the most jaded traveller to revisit the senses of innocence, hope and wonder that make travel so spiritually rejuvenating-- and to remember the experience as a slice of time independent of reality. (Or maybe it's just another behavioural paradox, like our habit of seeking freedom in the constraining environment of bars. the most constraining of environments; or clarity in beer, the most numbing of brews)
Surrounded by the living remnants of Barcelona's ongoing history, both past and future, I understood then what it was that had thickened the air and echoed beneath my feet. It was a real revelation that the city's artists, warriors and gypsies must have felt in their very cells.
That an essential part of memory's creation is, simply, forgetting.
If you go
WHERE TO STAY
Le Meridien Barcelona: Rambla 111; phone: 34 (93) 318 62 00; Web: http://www.meridienbarcelona.com. A great location and personal service have made this hotel the Barcelona home for the likes of Madonna, Prince and Michael Jackson.
Claris Hotel: Pau Claris 150; phone: 34 (93) 48 76 262; Web: http://www.derbyhotels.es. This five-star boutique has an on-site art gallery that exhibits the owner's collection of ancient Egyptian art.
Hotel Majestic: Paseo de Gràcia 68; phone: 34 (93) 487 39 39; Web: http://www.hotelmajestic.es. A chic bar and swanky design attract jet-setters and scenesters alike.
WHERE TO EAT
Beltxena: Mallorca 275, Barcelona; phone: 34 (93) 215 30 24.Fine Basque cuisine in charming surroundings. Reservations recommended.
Les Set Portes: Passeig Isabel II, 14; phone: 34 (93) 319 29 50. Picasso, Ava Gardner, and Che Guevera have all dined on the paellas and Catalan specialties of this local waterfront institution.
La Balsa: Infanta Isabel 4; phone: 34 (93) 211 50 48. Waiters and customers alike climb to the top of an old circular water tower to reach this popular spot, offering city views and international cuisine.
Bar del Pi: Pl. Sant Josep Oriol, 1; phone: 34 (93) 302 21 23. Overlooking the Church of Pi, this crowded and famous bar serves good tapas and bocadillos.
Txapela: Passeig de Gràcia 8; phone: 34 (93) 412 02 05. Tapas, sidra (cider) and Txacoli wine are on the menu at this typical Basque tavern.
Café del Sol: Plaza del Sol 16; phone: 34 (93) 415 56 63. This hip and trendy hangout bordering a lively plaza serves tapas outside.
Café del Opera: La Rambla 74, Barcelona; phone: 34 (93) 317 75 85.
Els Quatre Gats: Carrer de Montisió 3, Barcelona; phone: 34 (93) 302 41 40.
BARS, CLUBS AND ATTRACTIONS
Razzmatazz: Calle Almongàvares 122; 34 (93) 272 09 10; or visit the Web site http://www.salarazzmatazz.com.
Benidorm: Carrer de Joaquim Costa 39; 34 (93) 317 80 52.
La Macarena: Nou de Sant Francesc 5; 34 (93) 317 54 36.
Moog: Carrer Arc del Teatre 3; 34 (93) 301 72 82.; http://www.masimas.com/moog.
Apolo: Nou de la Rambla 113; 34 (93) 441 40 01; or visit the Web site at http://www.sala-apolo.com.
La Sagrada Familia: Mallorca 401; 34 (93) 207 30 31; http://www.sagradafamilia.org.
Casa Mila: Passeig de Gracià 92; 34 (93) 484 59 00.
Gran Teatre del Liceu: Rambla 61-65; 34 (93) 485 99 13; or visit the Web site http://www.liceubarcelona.com.
Palau Moja: Rambla 118.
SONAR festival: http://www.sonar.es.

