No matter how much we may want to, giving up our cars is easier said than done in Montreal - especially for families with children.
And perhaps no time of year underscores the dearth of better alternatives more than the dark depths of January.
Getting around with kids in winter is a slog. We wake before sunrise and return home after sundown. When the sun does shine, the temperature usually plunges. Taking children outside requires bundling them up until they resemble the Michelin Man. But taking them inside again means either sweating it out or stripping them down - and then carrying around armloads of parkas, pants, hats and mitts.
You can imagine the fun, then, of taking a toddler in a snowsuit on public transit. Even if you've got a stroller in which to stow all the extra layers, there's no guarantee you'll be able to get it up and down the stairs to the métro, since so few stations have elevators. It also may be tough to squeeze it aboard a crowded bus.
Car shares? A few have child seats in the trunk, but is it a bucket seat or a booster? Is it rear-facing or front-facing? What's required by law changes according to the age of your child. If you bring your own, you have to tote it with you, plus add time for installation to your outing. The same goes for taxis.
More and more families are choosing cycling as an option when there's no snow on the ground. Some pedal along with multiple kids loaded on rear carriers, the active transport version of the station wagon, while wheelbarrow-like bakfiets( https://www.bakfiets.com/ ), ubiquitous in Amsterdam, are increasingly appearing on Montreal streets. But winter cycling is for the hardy( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/winter-cycling-in-montreal-is-an-exercise-in-snowy-frustration ) as it is. The iffy status of snow-clearing on bike paths makes biking with kids in winter for the truly intrepid.
That leaves walking. Rain or shine, heat wave or blizzard, that's my preferred method of getting to and from work/school/daycare. Dress for the elements, swap the stroller for the sled if there's snow accumulation, and it's quite manageable if you're lucky enough to live within striking distance. It might even be faster than the bus if you factor in time lost waiting and potential delays. But sidewalks that are icier than many skating rinks( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/brownstein-montrealers-are-slip-slidin-away-on-icy-sidewalks ) can make being a pedestrian with kids perilous indeed. You certainly have to tread more carefully if you have an infant strapped to you in a carrier, or if you have a small hand to hold.
And all bets are off once the weekend rolls around. A packed itinerary of children's activities in disparate and far-flung locations across the city makes a car trip unavoidable in the face of the reduced Sunday transit schedule.
Is it any wonder, then, that Quebecers are buying more cars, driving bigger vehicles and logging more kilometres on the road?
That was one big takeaway from the latest inventory of the province's greenhouse gas emissions,( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-the-war-on-the-car-is-the-war-on-climate-change-in-quebec ) published in December. It certainly explains why Quebec is behind in reaching its reduction targets and underscores the urgency of action to curb our dependence on vehicles. The role of urban sprawl aside, these statistics also expose some inescapable sociological truths about the harried pace of modern life.
Even in Montreal, where it's arguably easiest to forgo the family vehicle, going car-free is not without obstacles.
Oh, sure, it's certainly possible. Le Devoir published a feature on Monday( https://www.ledevoir.com/societe/transports-urbanisme/545431/quand-les-familles-moderent-leur-transport ) talking to Montreal families who ditched their personal automobiles. However, those profiled all noted that it took careful planning and concerted effort to stick to their decision. We should all applaud their determination - and listen carefully to their experiences.
Since transportation is a significant and rising source of emissions in Quebec, tackling traffic is primordial. And if we want to keep families in the city and stop the exodus to the 'burbs, making it easier to navigate Montreal year-round is equally essential.
Many couples who don't have vehicles get one when baby makes three, for dashing to the doctor with a sick infant or to make the most of those narrow windows between naps. Of course, cars have their downsides in winter, too, since children in car seats cannot be safely buckled in wearing their snowsuits. Repeatedly dressing and undressing a kid to get to and from the car, then into and out of the child seat, is a chore in itself - and one that becomes especially onerous on frigid days.
But for far too many, it's still the least worst option.
ahanes@postmedia.com( mailto:ahanes@postmedia.com )
Related
Allison Hanes: Wild winter heightens urge to hibernate( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-wild-winter-heightens-urge-to-hibernate )
Allison Hanes: Embedded - a snow day survival guide( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-embedded-a-snow-day-survival-guide )

