OTTAWA - The federal government has agreed to review Quebec's claim for reimbursement of refugee claimants and is promising to take measures to ease the province's burden.
"We will work on the numbers together and we will find common ground," federal Transport Minister Marc Garneau said after Wednesday night's meeting of the task force on irregular migration, which was launched in August to deal with the crisis.
Ottawa has agreed to put in place a triage process for asylum seekers at the border to find out which province they want to go to. Those who do not wish to stay in Montreal will, depending on their skills, be directed to other areas of Quebec where there are labour shortages. The granting of their work permit will be accelerated so they can find a job as quickly as possible and pay for their living expenses.
Garneau also indicated that $74 million of the $173 million allocated in the last federal budget to manage irregular arrivals at the border will be used to speed up the processing of refugee claims by the Immigration and Refugee Board.
"This is a step in the right direction," said the Quebec Minister of Immigration David Heurtel. "The tone has changed. Already, there is more openness on the part of the federal government."
Heurtel expects to receive a cheque at the end of the exercise. "At one time it seemed like a completely closed door," he added. "What we have is a working group that is starting to work now. The federal experts will sit down with our experts, we will talk about cost breakdown. "
What had been an angry tone between Quebec and Ottawa softened before the meeting.
"The federal government recognizes very well that Quebec has had a lot on its shoulders in the last nine months with the majority of irregular migrants who have come to the province," Garneau said.
Quebec is demanding $146 million for the care of asylum seekers who entered the country illegally at the Canada-U.S. border near the St-Bernard-de-Lacolle post. This is a starting point, Heurtel said.
Earlier in the day, Couillard insisted front-line services are at a breaking point and turned up the heat by demanding Ottawa help manage asylum seekers landing here.
Couillard reminded the Trudeau government that managing borders is essentially a federal responsibility and centres harbouring asylum seekers will soon be filled to capacity, which is Ottawa's problem, not Quebec's.
"People in Ottawa need to realize our system is stretched and cannot be stretched any more. We can't have this (influx) year after year, after year. The system is going to bust. That's real life, that's the reality."
Over the last few weeks, the numbers have dramatically increased, with Quebec announcing the province's 1,850 spots for asylum seekers in four locations are rapidly filling up.
More than 70 per cent of spots are filled; once that hits 85 per cent, Quebec says it will no longer place anyone crossing the border illegally.
But in a letter to Heurtel, federal Immigration Minister Ahmed Hussen deplored the fact Quebec has only four temporary shelters up and running, while last summer it had opened 13, including making use of hotels, the former Royal Victoria Hospital and the Olympic Stadium.
Hussen said the situation risks causing delays at the border and an "unacceptable humanitarian situation."
The letter, Couillard said, shows Ottawa is completely disconnected with what's happening in Quebec.
"It shows a complete lack of understanding of what is happening in the field and what Quebec experienced last year( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/increase-in-asylum-seekers-at-border-in-december-as-2017-sets-record-for-claims ).
"Quebec played a humanitarian role last year and is ready to do it again, but within its capacity to do so. My message to Ottawa is to say it's time to start working. You (Ottawa) have to play your role right now."
RCMP officers help a group of asylum seekers who had crossed into Canada illegally at Roxham Rd., near Hemmingford Feb. 20, 2017.Hours before he headed to Ottawa for the talks on the crisis, Heurtel repeated Ottawa has failed to realize the number of asylum seekers this year has already tripled to 6,074 from about 2,000 during the same period in 2017.
Up to 400 crossings a day expected
The situation is completely different from last year when Quebec responded to what was a temporary wave of Haitian asylum seekers fleeing( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/influx-of-haitian-refugees-taxes-quebec-shelters-immigration-minister-says ) the United States after U.S. president Donald Trump said they were no longer welcome, he said.
Today's asylum seekers are coming from all over, including Nigeria and Asia. It is estimated 40 per cent don't want to stay in Quebec.
Heurtel said projections suggest there will be up to 400 crossings a day this summer, compared with 250 in 2017.
"What we are seeing is a new phenomenon and we have to react differently," said Heurtel noting none of the shelters used in 2017 were designed as long term housing for asylum seekers.
He said the issue isn't necessarily one of money but of real practical problems of capacity.
As an example, since the wave started last year Quebec has received about 2,500 children and they all needed access to the education system( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-schools-preparing-for-hundreds-of-asylum-seekers ). That is the equivalent of five new elementary schools in Montreal.
Quebec's opposition parties have stepped up the pressure on the Couillard government to act with Coalition Avenir Québec Leader François Legault highlighting the fact Ottawa has not yet received a detailed invoice from Quebec for the $146 million.
Over the last few days, Legault has called on the government to put a lid on the number of asylum seekers it accepts. Since Quebec's population is roughly 23 per cent of Canada's population, the number it accepts should be 23 per cent of the total, he says.
In 2017, Quebec received 50 per cent of the asylum seekers who had come to Canada, apparently because Roxham Rd. has taken on an international reputation as an easy way in.
The CAQ, which is also on the record as wanting fewer legal immigrants, does not spell out how the people are to be distributed in the rest of Canada but notes many were bused to Cornwall last year.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauuthier@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/philipauthier( http://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Related
Editorial: Decisions on asylum seekers should be expedited( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/editorials/editorial-decisions-on-asylum-seekers-should-be-expedited )
Opinion: Here's what Canada should do about 'irregular' asylum seekers( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/opinion-heres-what-canada-should-do-about-irregular-asylum-seekers )
Celine Cooper: Let's act to regularize flow of asylum seekers( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/celine-cooper-lets-act-to-regularize-flow-of-asylum-seekers )
CREDIT: Philip Authier, Montreal Gazette

