Welcome to today's live coronavirus pandemic coverage. Check this post throughout the day on Wednesday, June 10. Questions/comments? ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Uneven playing field for shut-out bar owners could lead to defiance
Soldiers will remain at CHSLDs until September, Ottawa says
Quebec reports 156 new cases, 52 more deaths
Céline Dion postpones all concerts to 2021
Montreal Impact resume season on July 8
Botanical Garden reopens June 15
Province cuts school tax to give Quebecers a break
More below
4:10 p.m. Despite loosened rules, Montreal West says it won't open day camps
Montreal West is joining Kirkland in announcing it will not open day camps this summer, despite the provincial government's decision to loosen counsellor-camper ratios.
"While... ratios can help private camps economically, it does nothing to assuage our concerns about running a day camp during this pandemic," Elizabeth Ulin, the town councillor in charge of recreation, wrote in an email to residents today.
"In fact, increasing the ratios (i.e. allowing more campers per councillor) would likely make it less safe for the campers, their families, our staff, and the wider community.
"So many of the government's day camp directives run counter to providing a healthy and enjoyable experience that we could not see a way to offer any safe and sensible activities. For instance, campers would have to remain two metres apart at all times (negating nearly all traditional camp games).
"Our available indoor locations are not air-conditioned, yet on rainy days, campers would be required to remain at the same location for the entire day, regardless of the heat. All areas used by the camp (many of our parks and playgrounds) would have to be fenced off and made inaccessible to the general public. Most alarming, treatment of any injury would be delayed by the wait time for a properly protected individual to assist."
3:40 p.m. Uneven playing field for shut-out bar owners could lead to defiance
Ziggy Eichenbaum won't be silenced. Nor will there be any silence at his namesake Crescent St. pub if Quebec doesn't change its stance on bars reopening.
Eichenbaum will open Ziggy's on July 1, and face the legal consequences if necessary. He's not the only one.
Read our full story, by Bill Brownstein.
"I've got to survive, too. I'm giving the government notice that I'm opening July 1. If I don't open then, I'll have to close for good," Ziggy Eichenbaum says of his namesake Crescent St. pub.
3 p.m. Unable to agree on Liberal aid bill, House of Commons adjourns until next week
From The Canadian Press:
OTTAWA - Opposition parties have refused to give unanimous consent to speedily pass the Trudeau government's latest emergency legislation.
They have also rejected the government's bid to split the bill in two, to allow promised benefits for Canadians with disabilities to go ahead.
Those benefits are now in limbo, along with other measures in the bill.
The bill includes a proposed expansion of the wage subsidy program to include seasonal workers and some additional businesses, as well as proposed penalties for fraudulently claiming the Canada Emergency Response Benefit.
It also proposes changes to the CERB in response to concerns that the benefit is discouraging people from returning to low-paying jobs.
Government House leader Pablo Rodriguez says the Liberals will attempt to find other ways to deliver on those promises.
That's just crazy. Bickering between government and opposition meant they can't even agree to debate a bill to help those with disabilities and crack down on coronavirus assistance cheats. So debate delayed until next week. Good grief.
- Don Martin (@DonMartinCTV) June 10, 2020
2:35 p.m. Updated charts, maps 1:40 p.m. Soldiers will remain at CHSLDs until September, Ottawa says
Canadian Armed Forces personnel will keep working at CHSLDs (long-term care homes) until September, federal Public Safety Minister Bill Blair said today.
"We have made a commitment to the province of Quebec that we will continue to provide that support until the middle of September, exactly as requested," Blair told the House of Commons.
Premier François Legault has asked for the members of the Canadian military who are helping in CHSLDs to remain in the province until mid-September.
Last month, National Defence Minister Harjit Sajjan suggested the Canadian Armed Forces would not be able to deploy for that long.
At a press conference earlier, federal Treasury Board president Jean-Yves Duclos said the defence minister's statement referred to the pace - at the time, some soldiers were working 12-hour days, seven days a week.
"We never considered abandoning Quebec seniors," Duclos said. "The Canadian Armed Forces will continue to be present as long as they are needed in Quebec or elsewhere in the country."
Asked how many would remain in Quebec, he did not answer directly.
"The situation has much improved in recent weeks because of the (soldiers' work)," he said. "And the Canadian Armed Forces will continue to be there as long as their presence is necessary."
As of yesterday, there are 933 Armed Forces personnel supporting civilian authorities in 14 CHSLDs.
Last month, they numbered more than 1,000.
Some soldiers will soon arrive at the Donald Berman Maimonides Geriatric Centre in Côte-St-Luc to help overwhelmed staff.
1:10 p.m. Quebecers want economic relaunch to be green: survey
Four out of five Quebecers want the province's economic recovery to be environmentally friendly, a new survey suggests.
The findings of the Léger Marketing poll commissioned by several environmental groups are being published just as debate rages in the National Assembly over Bill 61 - proposed legislation that would give the government extensive powers to accelerate economic activity, particularly in the area of infrastructure construction.
Read our full story
12:50 p.m. Vocational centres sift through 69,000 applications ahead of orderly training
Quebec's plan to train and hire 10,000 orderlies to work in long-term care residences kicks off across the province on Monday.
Employees at vocational centres are spending this week sifting through 69,000 applications for the posts.
Read our full story
12:10 p.m. Video: Soldiers reflect on experience as they leave Montreal CHSLD
Noon Federal officials provide update
11:45 a.m. Extending CERB could double $60-billion budget: federal watchdog
The Canada Emergency Response Benefit (CERB) gives financial support to Canadians affected by COVID-19, providing $500 a week for up to 16 weeks. The program is scheduled to end in September.
The New Democratic Party and the Bloc Québécois are calling for it to be extended.
Today, Parliament's spending watchdog said extending the CERB to provide more weeks of payments, and letting people earn some extra income, would cost the federal treasury an additional $64 billion.
Read our full story
11:10 a.m. Quebec reports 156 new cases, 52 more deaths
Quebec has recorded 156 new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to 53,341, the provincial government said this morning.
Fifty-two new deaths were reported. The death toll is now 5,081.
The number of hospitalizations stands at 914, a decrease of 47 from yesterday.
Of those in hospital, the number in intensive care remains unchanged at 117.
11 a.m. Céline Dion postpones all concerts to 2021
Céline Dion on today announced that she has postponed all her 2020 concerts and expects to be back on the road in 2021.
"I had really hoped that we'd be back on stage sometime this year, but nothing is more important than everyone's health and safety," Dion said.
Céline Dion Courage World Tour to resume in 2021! Rescheduled show dates announced for Europe, who's going to be there ??? / La tournée mondiale Courage reprendra en 2021! Qui sera des nôtres - ??- Team Céline
#CourageWorldTour
- Celine Dion (@celinedion) June 10, 2020
10:35 a.m. Alberta is giving away 20 million masks via drive-thrus
Happy to see our masks for Albertans programs has launched this morning.
You can get your package of 4 masks, free of charge, at @TimHortons @McDonaldsCanada @AWCanada drive-thru locations across Alberta.
- Jason Kenney (@jkenney) June 8, 2020
10:10 a.m. Despite no support from opposition, Liberals push forward with emergency bill
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's Liberals are pushing forward with a contentious piece of emergency legislation today that would extend COVID-19 aid programs, even though Opposition parties appear unlikely to allow it to move forward quickly.
Read our full story
10:05 a.m. Widespread mask-wearing could prevent second waves: study
Population-wide face mask use could push COVID-19 transmission down to controllable levels for national epidemics, and could prevent further waves of the pandemic disease when combined with lockdowns, according to a British study published today.
Read our full story
9:55 a.m. Let students have graduation ceremonies: Canadian pediatricians
Canadian pediatricians are calling on education ministers to allow "safe, in-person graduations."
"Transitions are frequently points of vulnerability," said Dr. Daphne Korczak, chair of the Canadian Paediatric Society's Mental Health Task Force.
"It will be challenging for kids to look forward to September if they aren't ready to make the move, if a part of them still feels they never really left their old school because of the abrupt end."
Quebec's education minister says graduation ceremonies are allowed but some of the province's schools have opted not to bring students together one last time.
As the school year ends, students transitioning into new schools or learning settings are being left behind with no closure and little support. We're calling on Education Ministries to allow safe, in-person graduations : #CanPoli #ChildHealth
- CdnPaediatricSociety (@CanPaedSociety) June 10, 2020
9:45 a.m. Montreal Impact resume season on July 8
Major League Soccer this morning announced that its season will resume on July 8.
The league said all 26 MLS clubs, including the Montreal Impact, will compete in the MLS is Back Tournament at ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex at Walt Disney World Resort in Florida beginning July 8.
The tournament will be played without fans in attendance.
De retour pour Montréal. #ImpactMontréalais#MLSisBack #IMFC
- Impact de Montréal (@impactmontreal) June 10, 2020
9:40 a.m. Botanical Garden reopens June 15
Montreal's Botanical Garden will reopen on June 15, Mayor Valérie Plante announced this morning. Entry will be free for children under 17 until Aug. 31.
The mayor also announced that the city will provide $6 million in extra funding to help boroughs run their summer camps this year.
The Garden will limit the number of visitors and is recommending visitors buy their timed tickets online in advance.
Excellente nouvelle pour les amoureux de la nature! Je suis heureuse d'annoncer que le Jardin Botanique @EspacePourLaVie ouvrira ses portes dès le 15 juin! Et surtout, pour encourager les familles à y aller, l'accès sera gratuit aux jeunes de 17 ans et moins.???? #polmtl
- Valérie Plante (@Val_Plante) June 10, 2020
9:35 a.m. Province cuts school tax to give Quebecers a break
To give Quebecers a financial break during the pandemic, the provincial government is cutting the school tax rate earlier than expected.
In its March budget, Premier François Legault's government reduced the school tax rate, with another cut planned for 2021. The first reduction was to slash school taxes by $182 million, the second one by $173 million.
Now, both reductions will be implemented as of July 1, Finance Minister Eric Girard announced this morning.
Girard called the move "an effective way to give Quebecers financial flexibility when they need it the most."
"It should be noted that the reduction of the school tax rate has no impact on funding for the education network," he said.
School taxes are based on property valuations. The new rate will be $0.1054 per $100 of property assessment.
9:20 a.m. Quebec won't investigate possible price-gouging during pandemic
Premier François Legault's government has rejected a Parti Québécois proposal to ask the province's consumer protection office to investigate alleged price-gouging during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Read our full story
9:15 a.m. CAQ creates a website to promote controversial Bill 61
The Coalition Avenir Québec government has launched a website to promote Bill 61, controversial legislation aimed at speeding up the province's economic relaunch.
The bill has drawn fire from opposition parties, an anti-corruption watchdog and environmental groups
Read our full story
9 a.m. Here's where you can get tested in Montreal today
Montrealers can be tested at free screening clinics across the island.
They are for people who 1) have symptoms or 2) don't have symptoms but have been in close contact with someone who has received a positive COVID-19 test result.
Today, nine testing centres are available across Montreal Island.
Some of the clinics require appointments.
9:05 a.m. Latest numbers
As of 4 a.m., there were 96,653 COVID-19 cases and 7,897 deaths in Canada. A total of 55,572 people have recovered.
Here is the breakdown by province and territory:
Quebec: 53,185 (5,029 deaths, 19,361 resolved)
Ontario: 31,090 (2,464 deaths, 24,829 resolved)
Alberta: 7,229 (151 deaths, 6,722 resolved)
British Columbia: 2,669 (167 deaths, 2,319 resolved)
Nova Scotia: 1,060 (62 deaths, 999 resolved)
Saskatchewan: 656 (13 deaths, 624 resolved)
Manitoba: 289 (7 deaths, 285 resolved)
Newfoundland and Labrador: 261 (3 deaths, 256 resolved)
New Brunswick: 147 (1 death, 121 resolved)
Prince Edward Island: 27 (27 resolved)
Repatriated Canadians: 13 (13 resolved)
Yukon: 11 confirmed (11 resolved)
Northwest Territories: 5 confirmed (5 resolved)
Nunavut: No confirmed cases
9 a.m. What's open and closed in Montreal
We are constantly updating our list of what is open and closed in Montreal
9 a.m. Nightly newsletter
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
ariga@postmedia.com
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
A timeline of the novel coronavirus in Quebec

