Our lives are very different from what they were a mere few weeks ago. We watch in deep sadness and anxiety as the tally of deaths both here and beyond continues to rise.
Those of us fortunate enough to have avoided the dreaded disease owe a huge debt of gratitude to the heroes in our midst. Above all, to all of the health-care community members who risk their lives daily to save those of their stricken fellow-citizens - but also to all those others whose untiring commitment ensures the continuing delivery of our essential services.
What is particularly striking and disturbing since the COVID-19 crisis exploded into a pandemic is the fragility of governments and institutions in responding to it. They are still scrambling to cope and find answers, some performing more effectively than others. However, the overall picture is of the emperor without his clothes, afraid, unsafe and unsure.
It was only a tiny short while ago that we were hearing continuous boasts about the booming economy, the ever-soaring stock market, and record-breaking job-creation and employment numbers. Then, in an instant, all those vaunted records evaporated like the mist, and turned into substantial losses and minuses. A totally new world reality has been born, and experts of all persuasions are telling us the pre-COVID-19 life we have known may never return.
Perhaps there is a lesson here for all of us, governments, institutions and individuals alike. The first is to be conscious of our own frailty, and of the dangers of taking ourselves too seriously - this applying above all to our leaders. COVID-19 is showing us how flimsy is the veneer of our structures and systems.
Second, we should reflect on our very concepts of government and governance, geared as they are to electoral success, and thus the short-term. The average life of a government is four years, and the actual operative time is significantly less. Platforms, policies and promises seldom dwell on long-term considerations. And when they do, they resort to cleverly couched notions and concepts, whose hallmark is elasticity and loose interpretation.
Yet the challenges we face as a collectivity are increasingly long-term ones. The population explosion, the depletion and desecration of nature and its resources; the huge disparities between have and have-nots; the incessant conflicts over ethnicity, faith and jurisdiction; and the corresponding challenges of meeting such basic needs as food, health and education, will continue to test the abilities and determination of our leaders and governments inevitably and increasingly. Every major forest fire is more devastating than the last, as is every tsunami, flood, earthquake or mudslide. Epidemics are likely to become pandemics, and COVID-19, sadly, may not be the last. Environmental and war refugees will keep roaming the world in ever-larger numbers in search of shelter and safety.
I know of Scandinavian governments that, several years ago, established precise and firm long-term energy plans until 2030, which to date they have observed faithfully. Even succeeding parties of other stripes respect them, conscious of not upsetting what has become an accepted national vision. The idea that long-term and visionary policies and plans, including targeted strategic systems and reserves in key sectors, do not possess electoral appeal is a fallacy.
Our world is changing in many ways. Younger generations, if our country and province are any guide, are highly educated and skilled, prescient and anxious about the future we are handing over to them.
So let us hope that COVID-19 may become a lesson in long-term anticipatory, preventive and reformative planning, and that our governments and leaders may have the courage and wisdom to aspire beyond electoral considerations. An increasingly aware and anxious citizenry will not only welcome it, but, it is to be hoped, demand it.
Clifford Lincoln is a former Quebec cabinet minister and former federal MP. He lives in Baie-D'Urfé.
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus )
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed: CHSLDs, COVID-19 and how we care for our elderly( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/fariha-naqvi-mohamed-chslds-covid-19-and-how-we-care-for-our-elderly/wcm/070dfa17-f66e-433d-87e7-20fb1576b983/ )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow the updates for April 20 right here. All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( http://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( http://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).

