Something big happened in Montreal this week, and it was a ray of sunshine for many members of Montreal's Black community, along with their allies. Not everyone is smiling, though.
"La vie des Noir.e.s compte" - and below that, in smaller font, "Black Lives Matter" - was painted across an entire block of Ste-Catherine St. between St-Hubert and St-André Sts. as Montreal joined the ranks of other major cities in making a bold statement in support of the global movement against systemic racism and discrimination.
While many see the giant artwork as a big step forward for the cause, some anglophones have taken to social media to complain. The slogan is known universally as "Black Lives Matter." Why the French translation?
It turns out that to get permission from the City of Montreal, organizers had to agree to make the message mostly in French, with smaller English lettering underneath.
My view, after reading through many online comments, is that the message ideally would be translated around the world into French, Arabic, Mandarin, Greek, Yiddish, Swahili and so on. I see nothing wrong with bringing this message to people in whatever language they speak. The point is the Black Lives Matter movement is predicated on unifying for a common cause.
It is reassuring to see this step being taken in our city. One hopes that this action - along with the peaceful protests in the wake of George Floyd's killing by Minneapolis police - will help create waves of change that reverberate throughout the systems that have oppressed members of the Black community for far too long.
Now that we have a giant slogan painted on a city block, what next?
We need to build a society with equal opportunities for all - Black people, Indigenous people, the racialized and marginalized. Our diverse communities must be represented at all levels of government and essential institutions. The era of white, middle-aged men leading the way must come to an end. If we are to commit to creating change, we must make sure it permeates the fabric of every board of directors, board of governors, oversight committees and levels of leadership.
If this is to happen, all of us must speak up. The next time you attend a conference or other event, or see one being promoted, take a look at whether it reflects the diversity of the community outside the room or conference hall. If you don't like what you see, say so. Don't let anyone tell you it can't be done any differently; I assure you that it can. But it takes all of us to question, call out and demand. We must collectively speak up in support of more diversity at events, on boards, in organizations - at every opportunity.
When I was growing up, I saw no one who looked like me in positions of authority, in leadership roles or on television. It is hard enough to grow up in an environment where you look different from everyone else. But to feel that the only people who can ever be in charge are those who are white - well, that adds insult to injury. I am blessed with parents who dared me to dream big dreams and encouraged me to shatter glass ceilings. Not everyone is so fortunate.
Our actions today will have an impact on future generations. When children see people who look like them in positions of authority, it gives them permission to dream big dreams.
So yes, La vie des Noir.e.s compte, absolument. But our efforts must not stop with a slogan, however big it's painted and whatever the language. Let's use this moment as a stepping stone to create waves of change throughout society.
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed is the founder and editor in chief of CanadianMomEh.com, a lifestyle blog.
twitter.com/canadianmomeh
Related
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed: Like COVID-19, heat wave reveals societal gaps
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed: Teen girls' racist video hits close to home

