Catch up on all the big stories that happened this week in Montreal.
Montreal will require masks in indoor spaces: Plante
The city of Montreal intends to pass a bylaw making face coverings mandatory in enclosed public places by July 27, Mayor Valérie Plante announced Monday afternoon. In a social media post, Plante said the city has come to the decision after witnessing outbreaks in surrounding suburbs in recent days, which could "undermine the efforts" the city has made since the beginning of the pandemic. "A setback would be a disaster for human lives and for our economy," the mayor wrote.
Close bars and enforce public health guidelines on terrasses, expert says
A spike in COVID-19 cases on the South Shore that's being blamed on two house parties and on patrons who flouted physical distancing guidelines at a crowded bar in late June should serve as a warning that it's too soon to reopen bars and too soon for Quebecers to let their guard down, says an expert on community disease transmission. "From an epidemiological perspective, there's no question about it - I would not open bars," said David Buckeridge, a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at McGill University's school of population and global health.
REM construction ramps up amid parking and graffiti concerns
Construction of the Réseau express métropolitain (REM) is ramping up across Montreal, including the West Island, where two giant launching gantries - dubbed Anne and Marie - are altering the suburban landscape one chunk of elevated concrete at a time. A massive new span installed over St-Charles Blvd. in Kirkland last week caught the attention of drivers and the mayor, who called it "an unbelievable sight" - even if some citizens were less impressed. "Maybe some people think it's ugly," said Kirkland Mayor Michel Gibson, a proponent of the 67-kilometre light-rail network and its 26 stations linking downtown Montreal with the suburbs. The COVID-19 pandemic temporarily shut down construction of the REM, but work gradually resumed on May 11.
Health officials battle COVID-19 and already deadly extreme heat
As a cushion of hot air smothers southern Quebec for the third time in as many months, public health officials who have already seen heat-related deaths this year worry about managing the extreme heat and coronavirus at the same time. As temperatures rose above 30 C this week - prompting yet another heat warning from Environment Canada - Dr. David Kaiser, the physician responsible for the environmental health unit at Montreal public health, grew concerned. He and his colleagues had scrambled in late May when an unseasonable heat wave struck the city amid the height of the COVID-19 crisis. A few weeks later, a June heat wave claimed several lives.
Aaron Derfel: Young people and regions are driving Quebec's COVID-19 spread
After being overshadowed by Montreal and its soaring rates of COVID-19 infections and deaths for most of the pandemic, Quebec's regions are now reporting a disturbing number of cases - with nearly all of them resulting from community transmission. On Friday, the public health director of the Outaouais region expressed concern her investigators are unable to retrace all the contacts of those who have become infected with the pandemic illness. "Unfortunately, since the beginning of July, the number of cases has started to go back up," Dr. Brigitte Pinard told reporters at a news conference in Gatineau.

