Saturday, July 11, 2020: Here are some of the stories we've been following today.
Amber Alert: Bodies of missing girls, 6 and 11, found in wooded area
The search for two missing girls came to a tragic end Saturday when searchers found the girls' lifeless bodies in a wooded area of St-Apollinaire. Authorities are still searching for the girls' father, 44-year-old Martin Carpentier, who is believed to have abducted his daughters, Romy Carpentier, six, and Norah Carpentier, 11. Read more here( /news/amber-alert-bodies-of-missing-girls-found ).
Been to a bar drinking this month? Better get tested for COVID-19
Montreal public health officials are asking people who have frequented a bar since July 1 to be tested for COVID-19 because of an outbreak of cases in several drinking establishments. At least five bars in the past 11 days on the island of Montreal have reported customers or employees were carrying the coronavirus, health officials said. Read more here( /news/local-news/been-to-a-bar-drinking-this-month-better-get-tested-for-covid-19 ).
Oka Crisis, 30 years later: Kanesatake's long struggle for land rights
The Kanesatake land claim has been described as "perhaps the most difficult" of any dating from before Confederation. Unlike its sister communities of Kahnawake and Akwesasne, Kanesatake is not an official reserve but a checkerboard of Crown lands, totalling 828 hectares in 1990. Here are some milestones in Kanesatake's long struggle for land rights. Read more here.( /news/local-news/oka-crisis-30-years-later-kanesatakes-long-struggle-for-land-rights )
The Pines that set off the Oka Crisis: 'Once that's gone, what's left?'
Settlers won't need an army to take what's left of the land. They won't need to disperse protesters with tear gas, to dig trenches and lay barbed wire around the settlement in Kanesatake as they did 30 years ago. They won't have to equip thousands of soldiers with rifles, tanks and helicopters to besiege the community of 1,700. In the end, all it will take to cut the Mohawks off from their 689-square-kilometre land claim is the slow, brutal passage of time. Read more here( /news/the-land-in-the-pines ).
Mohawks take PM to task over unanswered land claims on 30th anniversary of Oka crisis
Mohawks from Kanesatake to Kahnawake took Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to task Saturday for failing to answer their centuries-old land claims( /news/local-news/oka-crisis-30-years-later-kanesatakes-long-struggle-for-land-rights/wcm/699dd766-183f-43c6-ba8c-0f434546a080/ ) on the 30(th)anniversary of the start of the Oka crisis. A convoy of about 100 vehicles carrying Kahnawake residents - many of them sporting Mohawk flags - crossed the Mercier Bridge into LaSalle and back Saturday morning as part of a "rolling blockade" to commemorate the event. Read more here( /news/local-news/rolling-blockade-in-kahnawake-commemorates-30-years-of-oka-crisis ).
Opinion: 30 years after Oka, let's not allow history to repeat itself
Thirty years ago, on July 11, 1990, Quebec entered one of its worst human, social and political crises. The climate of violence that we witnessed from that July to the end of September 1990 had dramatic consequences, including the death of a serving Sûreté du Québec officer. Read more here( /opinion/opinion-14 ).
Josh Freed: Montreal divided between the masked and the maskless
They kept telling us the second wave was coming, but who knew it would be a heat wave? The sweltering temperatures have made COVID-coping even more tricky, as many people are sweating and gasping through their masks. It's all part of our confusing, contradictory new world where fast-changing events, science and personal attitudes have people living in vastly different worlds. Read more here( /opinion/columnists/josh-freed-montreal-divided-between-the-masked-and-the-maskless ).
Quebec reports 91 new COVID-19 cases and 8 deaths
Quebec's daily COVID-19 report details 91 new cases, bringing the total number of cases to 56,407. There are 313 hospitalizations, a decrease of four, with 22 patients in intensive care, a decrease of two. Eight new deaths were reported, with four of them occurring before July 3, 2020. The total number of deaths in Quebec is currently at 5,620. Read more here( /news/local-news/quebec-reports-91-new-covid-19-cases-and-8-deaths ).

