This post was updated throughout the day on Monday, May 25. Questions/comments? ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Deciphering Quebec's deconfinement plan
Quebec reports 573 new cases, 85 more deaths
Malls outside Montreal can reopen on Monday
Live video: Downtown Montreal reopens for business
Trudeau seeks 10 days of paid sick leave for workers
Fleur-de-lis masks up for grabs
What is shopping like in reopened Montreal? Very different.
More below
5:10 p.m. That's it for today
Join me tomorrow for another live blog.
4:45 p.m. Ontario blames Mother's Day gatherings for jump in COVID-19 cases
From The Canadian Press:
TORONTO - Mother's Day gatherings contrary to physical distancing rules helped boost Ontario's COVID-19 cases, the health minister said Monday, and those rising numbers plus concern over a large crowd at a Toronto park over the weekend are delaying any easing of those rules.
Ontario reported more than 400 new COVID-19 cases Monday for a fifth straight day, higher than the province has seen for several previous five-day periods.
That trend predates the province's Stage 1 of reopening launched on May 19, Health Minister Christine Elliott said.
"The increase in the number of cases that we're seeing now in the last few days really relates back to the week before, with the Mother's Day events and so on, people seeing families when they should not have been more than five people together," she said.
Premier Doug Ford himself has admitted that two of his daughters who don't live at home visited that weekend, in a group of at least six people. Provincial officials have told Ontarians to avoid being within two metres of anyone outside their household, and not to gather in groups larger than five.
4:42 p.m. Monkland Ave. comes back to life - at least a little bit
With the reopening of stores on Monday, there was a little more life on Monkland Ave. But it will require the reopening of the dining rooms of the street's myriad bars and restos - which are now mostly reduced to offering takeout - for it to return to being one of the city's more bustling streets.
Read the full column by Bill Brownstein.
4:40 p.m. A day in a New York City ER
He fought and survived Ebola, and now he's on the frontline of #COVID19 in NYC.
This is a day working in the ER, as told by Dr.@Craig_A_Spencer
- AJ+ (@ajplus) May 24, 2020
4:25 p.m. Quebec to review status of asylum seekers on pandemic front lines
Quebec will review "one by one" the files of asylum seekers being employed on the pandemic front lines with the goal of accepting them officially as immigrants, Premier François Legault said Monday.
His apparent about-face came in response to pleas from lawyers and humanitarian groups calling for the normalization of the status of hundreds of these workers who are today risking their lives in long-term care residences (CHSLDs), where most of Quebec's COVID-19 deaths occurred.
Read our full story, by Philip Authier.
4:20 p.m. Montreal tops 24,000 cases
Montreal Island added 198 COVID-19 cases over the past 24 hours, bringing the total to 24,116.
An additional 30 deaths were recorded. The death toll on the island is now 2,558.
With 2,663 cases per 100,000 population, Montreal North remains the epicentre. Rivière-des-Prairies-Pointe-aux-Trembles is in second place, with 1,792 cases per 100,000 population.
For more on the situation on the island, visit this Montreal public health page
4:05 p.m. What can we learn from Japan?
Japan's state of emergency is set to end with new cases of the coronavirus dwindling to mere dozens. It got there despite largely ignoring the default playbook.
Read our full story
3:50 p.m. Montreal flags at half-mast to honour COVID-19 victims
Aujourd'hui, les drapeaux de la cité administrative de la @MTL_Ville sont en berne, en mémoire des victimes de la COVID-19. Mes pensées et celles de l'ensemble des élu.e.s montréalais.e.s accompagnent leurs proches. #polmtl #cmmtl
- Valérie Plante (@Val_Plante) May 25, 2020
3:30 p.m. Deciphering Quebec's deconfinement plan
As I mentioned earlier, Quebec today published a tentative deconfinement plan.
It includes some clues as to what will be reopening in the near future.
Unless there is an increase in COVID-19 cases, it appears that some tourism businesses, including campgrounds, could reopen in early June.
Outdoor pools and Montreal malls seem to be on track to reopen in mid to late June, according to the government's plan. Phase One of the reopening of restaurants would be in the same time frame, as would the return of team sports.
Religious services, gyms, cruises, mass gatherings and professional sports would return some time after that.
Quebec is currently in Phase 4.
3 p.m. Payments for Canada Emergency Response Benefit top $40 billion
From The Canadian Press:
OTTAWA - A key federal benefit for Canadians out of work, or seeing large drops in their earnings, in the COVID-19 pandemic has paid out over $40 billion in emergency aid.
Federal figures posted Monday show payments from Canada Emergency Response Benefit now total $40.33 billion to 8.21 million separate applicants, pushing the program further beyond its $35-billion budget.
However, billions could be clawed back next year when the government taxes the earnings and recoups improperly paid benefits.
2:55 p.m. Video: Turning 100 under lockdown
Brenda Lorraine Roland of St-Lambert turned 100 years old under lockdown
2:25 p.m. Montreal homeless haven't seen 'one penny' of emergency funds: shelter director
Montreal is being shortchanged on emergency funding meant to go toward fighting the spread of COVID-19 among its homeless population, according to three experts on homelessness.
Read our full story, by Christopher Curtis.
2:35 p.m. Are Quebec's long-term care centres prepared for a heat wave?
Here's what Health Minister Danielle McCann had to say this afternoon about the lack of air conditioning in the vast majority of Quebec CHSLDs (long-term care centres).
2:20 p.m. 'We could use you': Legault encourages youth to work in health network
Quebec Premier François Legault on Monday encouraged Quebec youth to seek work in the province's health-care system.
"If you want to take care of the most vulnerable, if you're looking to make a difference, we could use you in our health network," he said.
Read our full story, by Matthew Lapierre.
1:55 p.m. Updated charts, maps 1:50 p.m. Quebec reports 573 new cases, 85 more deaths; malls outside Montreal can reopen on Monday
(CORRECTION: An earlier version of this item said the asylum motion had been presented by Québec solidaire. In fact, it was put forward by independent MNA Catherine Fournier Apologies for the error.)
Quebec has recorded 573 new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to 47,987, Premier François Legault said in his briefing this afternoon.
There were 85 new deaths reported. The death toll is now 4,069.
He said 43 of the newly reported deaths occurred over the past 24 hours.
Legault also said:
Quebec's immigration department will review the cases of asylum seekers who work in the province's seniors' centres to see if some of them could be treated as immigration applicants rather than refugees. He had previously rejected this idea and his Coalition Avenir Québec government recently rebuffed a motion proposed by independent MNA Catherine Fournier recognizing the work of asylum seekers.
Malls across Quebec (but not yet in Greater Montreal) can reopen on Monday, June 1.
Quebec is looking into the paid sick days for workers that Prime Minister Justin Trudeau discussed at his briefing this morning. Legault said one question is who will pay for those days.
Quebec has published a chart showing the reopening phases for the province. (See below)
A reporter noted that very few Quebec long-term centres have air conditioning even as Montreal is preparing for a heatwave this week
Health Minister Danielle McCann said Quebec is working on a plan to create more air-conditioned areas in long-term care centres. Because the electrical service in many centres could not power air conditioning, the plan involves installing generator-powered units blowing cold air into the buildings.
But it was unclear from her answer whether some of these new areas could be in place this week.
You can watch the press conference below:
12:40 p.m. Montrealers line up downtown to get into newly reopened stores
There were lineups on Ste-Catherine St. Monday morning as shoppers waited eagerly to get into stores on the first day they were permitted to reopen since Quebec locked down to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
Read our full story, by Jason Magder.
12:35 p.m. 'It's inhumane' that so few rooms in CHSLDs have air conditioning: patient advocate
As the first heat wave of the year threatens to further distress residents of Quebec's long-term care centres this week, advocates are calling on the provincial government to ensure every resident has access to a cooler room to fend off the heat.
Here's our full story, by Jesse Feith.
12:30 p.m. How does Quebec compare to U.S. states? Not very well
Per-capita COVID-19 deaths in Ontario (15 per 100K) are higher than per-capita deaths in 31 U.S. states.
Per capita COVID-19 deaths in Quebec (49 per 100K) are higher than per-capita deaths in 43 U.S. states.
25/05/20
Sources: New York Times:
- Steven Chase (@stevenchase) May 25, 2020
12:25 p.m NDP pushes for paid sick leave
Following up on the earlier item about paid sick leave, here's what NDP Leader Jagmeet Singh had to say on the topic earlier today.
12:05 p.m. Live video: Downtown Montreal reopens for business
Montreal Gazette reporter Jason Magder is taking a stroll down Ste-Catherine St.
Noon Video: Montreal dogs (and dog owners) are happy
11:55 a.m. Boris
11:50 a.m. Trudeau seeks 10 days of paid sick leave for workers
At his press conference this morning, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said he will work with provinces to give 10 days of paid sick leave per year.
"Nobody should have to choose between taking a day off work due to illness or being able to pay their bills," he said.
Earlier today, federal New Democrats said they are conditioning their support for a plan to continue suspending full House of Commons sittings on real action from the Liberal government on paid sick leave for all Canadians and support for people with disabilities struggling with COVID-19, The Canadian Press reported.
In his opening statement today, Trudeau said all Canadians have a responsibility to continue to practice physical distancing. Despite the nicer weather and the gradual reopening of the economy, "we're not out of the woods yet," he said.
Trudeau also urged commercial landlords to apply for the Canada Emergency Commercial Rent Assistance Applications opened this morning.
The prime minister did not answer when several reporters asked questions about his Liberal Party of Canada benefiting from the federal emergency wage subsidy that his government passed.
Among the unanswered questions: Why is his party taking it and did he anticipate that political parties would take it when the measure was brought in?
Instead of answering directly, Trudeau spoke in general about why the program is important to help Canadians. He said the government "needs to support Canadians regardless of the organization they work for."
The Conservatives and NDP are also taking the wage subsidy. The Bloc Québécois says it will not apply.
Trudeau was also asked if he's confident that Canada's health care system is ready for a second wave. In response, he said dozens of international flights have arrived with personal protective equipment and more are on the way. He said domestic production is also ramping up.
11 a.m. Bloc Québécois denounces Liberals, Conservatives for taking emergency federal aid
"I find it absolutely unacceptable" that other political parties are claiming COVID-19 payments via the wage subsidy, says Bloc Leader @yfblanchet
. "The Liberals don't need it and the Conservatives don't need it. Maybe the NDP needs it. Maybe the Greens need it. We do not."
- Bill Curry (@curryb) May 25, 2020
10:35 a.m. How would you feel about a four-day work week?
That idea of a four-day work week recently got a boost when New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern floated it, as a way to help the country as it reopens following the lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
And it may not be as far-fetched as it would have seemed just a few months ago, before the shutdowns, which brought Canada, New Zealand and many countries around the world to a standstill.
Read our full story
10:30 a.m. Crunch time for Canada's big banks
To avoid a wave of defaults, Canada's big banks have allowed more than 700,000 Canadians to skip or defer mortgage payments since March. Those measures were announced with little discussion about what they meant for the bottom line.
That will change this week when the Big Six banks report earnings for the quarter ended April 30, starting with Bank of Nova Scotia and National Bank of Canada on May 26.
Read our full story
10 a.m. Excitement, nervousness among retailers as Montreal reopens
Some business owners in the Montreal area said Sunday that they're preparing to find a new normal as Quebec prepares to further relax measures aimed at curbing the spread of COVID-19.
Masks, plexiglass barriers, frequent distinfecting and no-touch browsing are some of the measures being put in place by retailers beginning Monday as the city becomes the final region in the province to be allowed to reopen retail stores, as long as they have a door to the outside.
Read our full story
9:50 a.m. Fleur-de-lis masks up for grabs
The Fête Nationale parade on St-Jean-Baptiste Day is cancelled and gatherings will have to be small this year due to the pandemic.
But you can still celebrate the Fleur-de-lis, the Société St-Jean-Baptiste de Montréal says. It's selling Quebec-made blue masks. There are four styles, each featuring one or multiple fleur de lis. Price: $14.98. Some of the profits will go to "organizations in need."
For more info, visit the SSJB's website
Four styles of masks are available, including this one featuring the Quebec flag.
9:25 a.m. What is shopping like in reopened Montreal? Very different.
All eyes are on Montreal today as some retail businesses in the region reopen for the first time in more than two months. (Quebec reopened retail stores outside Montreal two weeks ago.)
Chantal Rouleau, the provincial minister responsible for the Montreal region, this morning wished businesses well and urged shoppers to practice physical distancing.
La semaine passée, j'étais avec Emile Roux de @DCV_Montreal en prévision de l'ouverture des commerces ayant pignon sur rue. Je souhaite à tous les commerces une belle première journée.
N'oubliez pas de respecter les règles de la santé publique lors de vos emplettes!
- Chantal Rouleau (@rouleauchantal) May 25, 2020
To help those taking buses and the métro to get to work or to shop, transit agencies are handing out hundreds of thousands of masks to riders starting today. Public health authorities say transit users should wear face coverings.
[Let's take care of each other] ?????? Starting Monday, we will start giving out reusable face coverings at multiple métro stations. Let us remind you that wearing a face covering is strongly suggested when traveling by bus or by métro.

- STM (@stminfo) May 22, 2020
What will shopping be like?
Very different.
Initially, store hours will be reduced to allow for thorough and more frequent cleaning. Outdoor lineups will be commonplace, with security guards watching over waiting shoppers.
Inside, customers can expect a very usual shopping experience, with masked employees, plexiglass barriers aplenty and multiple signs that underline hygiene measures and the importance of physical distancing.
Read our full story, by Frédéric Tomesco.
9:15 a.m. Here's where you can get tested in Montreal today
Montrealers can be tested at free screening clinics across the island.
They are for people who 1) have symptoms or 2) don't have symptoms but have been in close contact with someone who has received a positive COVID-19 test result.
Today, nine testing centres are available across Montreal Island.
Find the nearest test clinic here Note some of the clinics require appointments.
(2 de 2) #COVID19 ??May 25th The mobile #testing buses are moving around the city right now. Discover today's destinations! More details:
Walk-in#MTLPublicHealth #StrongerTogether
- Santé Montréal (@santemontreal) May 25, 2020
8:45 a.m. Across Canada, almost 85,000 cases, 6,500 deaths
As of 4 a.m., there were 84,699 COVID-19 cases and 6,424 deaths in Canada. A total of 43,998 people have recovered.
Here is the breakdown by province and territory:
Quebec: 47,411 (3,984 deaths, 14,331 resolved)
Ontario: 25,500 (2,073 deaths, 19,477 resolved)
Alberta: 6,860 (135 deaths, 5,924 resolved)
British Columbia: 2,517 (157 deaths, 2,057 resolved)
Nova Scotia: 1,050 (58 deaths, 973 resolved)
Saskatchewan: 632 (7 deaths, 538 resolved)
Manitoba: 281 (7 deaths, 268 resolved), 11 presumptive
Newfoundland and Labrador: 260 (3 deaths, 254 resolved)
New Brunswick: 121 (120 resolved)
Prince Edward Island: 27 (27 resolved)
Repatriated Canadians: 13 (13 resolved)
Yukon: 11 (11 resolved)
Northwest Territories: 5 (5 resolved)
Nunavut: No confirmed cases
8:30 a.m. What's open and closed in Montreal
We are constantly updating our list ofwhat is open, and mostly what is closed, in Montreal
8:30 a.m. Nightly newsletter
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here:montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
8:30 a.m. If you have symptoms
Quebecers who think they have symptoms of COVID-19 should call Quebec's hotline at 1-877-644-4545.
ariga@postmedia.com
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
A timeline of the novel coronavirus in Quebec

