Montreal opposition leader Lionel Perez( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-passes-rejects-anti-semitism-definition/ ) says his son has tested positive for COVID-19 and was apparently in the house when Perez held an intimate engagement party for his daughter.
On Tuesday, Perez's daughter - who lives with her parents in Montreal - and his future son-in-law - who lives in New York - celebrated their engagement long distance via Zoom, the videoconferencing app that has seen its popularity surge during the coronavirus pandemic( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Perez decided to add a festive note by asking a musician friend to serenade the family from the driveway. Several well-wishers passed by to take part in the celebrations, albeit at a good distance from the house, Perez said.
In a written statement sent to reporters just before midnight Wednesday, Perez said he now regrets holding the celebration.
"I now understand that under the current crisis, it was not advisable to hold this family activity, for which we didn't predict the enthusiastic reaction of passersby, " Perez said. "If I had to do it over again, I would do things differently, to be more prudent."
The celebration took place despite the fact that both Perez and his son were isolating themselves because his son had tested positive for the virus. Perez said his son did not have any symptoms despite the positive test.
"I advised the city clerk as well as the Plante administration and my own caucus about the situation," Perez said. "We put in place strict isolation measures at home, and I am also isolated. I asked to be tested, but did not fit the criteria set forth by the public health department."
He added that his son went outside for a brief period during the event, but was told to go back in the house.
Perez, who represents the Darlington district in the Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough, said the plan for the celebration respected the rules for social distancing since his friend remained outside.
"Besides celebrating the engagement, it was really an opportunity to uplift my neighbours at a time when we really have the need," said the Ensemble Montréal leader, who compared the event to balcony concerts that have become popular in many countries during the coronavirus crisis.
Perez added that most of his neighbours appreciated the musical interlude and waved from their porches. But someone called 911 and reported that a gathering was underway, in contravention of rules preventing social gatherings during the pandemic.
Montreal police dispatched several squad cars and told Perez to shut down the celebration.
"At every single moment, the rules were respected," Perez said.
"The quasi-totality of people were on their porches and on their balconies," he added.
Perez said he did not invite anyone, including his elderly parents who live three blocks away. Only Perez, his wife and their four children were inside the house.
However, a few people who happened to be walking past the house stopped to offer well wishes while keeping a two-metre distance, Perez added.
Perez said that when police arrived he immediately co-operated with them and asked his musician friend to leave.
"I can understand why people would be concerned, but I think that people have to realize that the rules were respected at all times, and if ever there was a risk of them not being followed I would have put a stop to it immediately," Perez said.
Marvin Rotrand, the independent councillor for Snowdon, said he believed Perez when he said the rules were respected.
"I've now known Lionel Perez for over 10 years and he is not someone who would ever flout rules or put the public at risk," Rotrand said.
Rotrand questioned whether Perez's public profile, or the fact he is identifiable as Jewish because he wears the kippah, might have played a role in the incident.
Asked whether anti-Semitism might have played a role, Perez refused to comment.
Julien Lévesque, a media relations officer with the Service de police de la Ville de Montréal, said visits made by police to private homes are confidential and declined to provide details.
mscott@postmedia.com( mailto:mscott@postmedia.com )
Jason Magder of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report
Related
Montreal-area police holding off on coronavirus-related tickets, for now( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-area-police-holding-off-on-coronavirus-related-tickets-for-now/wcm/cafebe72-16e1-4270-aacb-92c2d1bb1204/ )
No visits to Quebec seniors' residences, Legault orders( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/coronavirus-no-visits-to-quebec-seniors-residences-legault-orders/wcm/6ed529f5-e23d-4c9a-bd9d-e9d3ff4fb3cd/ )
Allison Hanes: Don't be the idiot who ruins daily walks for everyone( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/allison-hanes-dont-be-the-idiot-who-ruins-daily-walks-for-everyone/wcm/8c6ecbff-1faf-4616-bc59-4a9f1b20da4e/ )
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus/ )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow their updates on April 2 right here( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-ottawa-braces-for-flood-of-calls-for-financial-help/wcm/cb728f7d-1673-48a8-a02e-130631529862/ ). All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).

