Sometimes a photographer's assignment is very specific, such as "construction of the Champlain Bridge." Other times, it's incredibly vague: "There is freezing rain. Tell us a story." Somewhere in the middle, experience and happenstance collide in the perfect shot.
Here are our photographers' favourite shots of 2018.
Pierre Obendrauf: 'And then they kissed'
May 6, 2018.
I was walking around downtown looking for pictures between two assignments - Place des Festivals always brings out people. I saw Mikael Gervais and Laurence Crete on the other side of the fountain, enjoying a romantic weekend away from their hometown, Gatineau. I took pictures of them talking, looking at maps, drinking water - and then they kissed.
March 15, 2018.
More than 200 dogs were rescued from a dog-meat farm in South Korea. They were going crazy because of all the media present, so to try to get a sense of what they might be feeling in their new environment, I focused on one: Sunny, the Korean jindo, who was being held by Humane Society International's Chantal Ducharme. I got on my stomach and I could sense he could smell my three cats on my clothes. So then I played with his inquisitiveness and was lucky enough to get it to work.
Jan. 23, 2018.
Freezing rain hit the city overnight and we needed something early for the web. Marie-Philippe Bois was already well underway de-icing her vehicle and she was gracious enough to let me get inside her car to get this picture.
John Mahoney: When it all comes together
Aug. 29, 2018.
It was a double bill: Deep Purple and Judas Priest at the Bell Centre, and I could take pictures during the first three songs of each band's performance. Usually when I shoot a concert, I make sure to get a good selection of pictures of the lead singer and only then do I shoot the supporting musicians. Just when I started looking for pictures of guitarist Richie Faulkner, they unleashed the smoke machine - and with some backlight on Faulkner's sunglasses, the picture came together.
July 5, 2018.
I was assigned to photograph Olivia Lavallee at her home on the South Shore for a sports column by Stu Cowan about her swimming in the World Down Syndrome Championship in Nova Scotia. I hoped I'd be able to get a photo of her in a pool, so I made sure my GoPro camera had a full charge. But the only place to get her in water was in the family's above-ground pool in their backyard. I had Olivia swim back and forth across the round pool, sticking the underwater camera in the water and firing as many frames as I could without being able to see exactly what the camera was capturing. At one point, Olivia stopped to reposition her swim goggles and that made the best frame.
May 8, 2018
When a couple of busloads of senior citizens arrived at the Russian consul general's residence for a ceremony commemorating the end of the Second World War, I was immediately drawn to these two gentlemen wearing their veterans' uniforms and chests-full of medals. Before the ceremony, they engaged in a lively conversation and I had my photo. Only afterward did I learn that David Ficherman, on the left, was 103 years old, and his friend Shulin Grinberg was 96.
Dave Sidaway: Now that's a lot of construction
April 6, 2018.
Transport Quebec crews start to assemble huge scaffolding on the east side of the St-Jacques St. overpass. Three of my favourite photos this year are of major construction sites - Montreal hasn't seen this much major construction at the same time in decades.
Oct. 25, 2018.
The main structure of the new Champlain Bridge should be completed by Dec. 21, but it won't be open to traffic until the summer of 2019.
May 8, 2018.
The Société de transport de Montréal is building an underground garage at the Côte-Vertu station on the métro's Orange Line. It's expected to be finished in 2021 at a cost of $330 million.
Allen McInnis: Heat waves and ice
July 27, 2018.
I generally do not like shooting concerts. Photographers are often micro-managed by the PR teams working for the bands, and photo opportunities can be limited. AFI was high energy on stage - when I saw Hunter Burgan climb on a speaker, I didn't take my eyes off him. When he leaped off, I knew I had at least one good one.
July 23, 2018.
Montreal was in the middle of a heat wave. While walking along the Lachine Canal, I saw the misting station at Atwater Market and this young girl, Anokhi, who was enjoying the mist as her father, Arijit Nandi, lifted her to the peak of the stream.
Feb. 10, 2018.
Nashville Predators defenceman P.K. Subban has words with Montreal Canadiens right wing Brendan Gallagher after being driven into the boards by Gallagher during NHL action in Montreal. I wasn't on the schedule to shoot hockey that night, but really wanted to be there for the return of P.K. Shooting through a small hole in the glass, where only a portion of the rink is viewable, I was lucky that this transpired right in front of my window to the rink.
Related
The year in review: The best previously unpublished pictures of 2018( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-5W5k )
Step through the looking glass to 2018 Year in Review( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/2018-year-in-review )

