With an estimated price tag of more than a quarter of a billion dollars, Montreal's future ozonation plant, being built to disinfect the city's waste water before it's flushed into the St. Lawrence River, will be the largest in the world.
When that will start happening, however, and how much it will actually cost, is still up in the air. Originally forecast to be running this year, built at a total cost of $285 million, city officials are now saying they are in the process of putting out calls for tender, looking for companies to bid on the construction of the plant. Given the time delays inherent in that process, it appears the city will not be hitting its 2018 deadline. City officials would not respond to questions this week about whether or not the $285-million estimate still stands, and why deadlines will not be met.
"The project is following its course," city spokesperson Gabrielle Fontaine-Giroux wrote in an email. "A contract was given for the supply of equipment in 2016 and for an electric plant in 2017. The call for tenders for construction will be launched in 2018.
"Because the estimate of costs of construction will be used in that process, it cannot be communicated before the public launch of the call for tenders, (nor can we) announce the opening date of the new factory, or the total cost of the project."
The administration of former mayor Denis Coderre announced in early 2015 it would build the ozonation centre( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreals-waste-water-to-be-cleaned-using-ozone-starting-in-2018 ) at the J.R.-Marcotte water and sewage treatment plant situated on the eastern edge of the island by 2018. The cost was estimated at $285 million, with 85 per cent of the bill being covered by the provincial and federal governments.
The ozonation plant would be the world's biggest, officials said, able to purify the equivalent of two Olympic Stadiums full of water being flushed into the Saint Lawrence River every 24 hours.
In 2015, the city said it had awarded a $99-million contract to build an ozonation plant to create ozone gas to French firm Dégremont Ltée. That firm gave the only bid deemed suitable out of a total of two submitted, after a tendering process that took four years. Dégremont's bid was also 40 per cent higher than the city's estimates. City officials said the variation arose because it had no projects of a similar scale on which it could base cost projections.
The city said it planned to launch a call for tenders in 2016 for the construction of buildings needed for ozonation, and another for the production of oxygen necessary in the process, Le Devoir reported( http://www.ledevoir.com/societe/environnement/467438/important-projet-d-ozonation-des-eaux-usees-de-montreal )at the time. Asked whether those elements had been carried out, city officials did not respond this week.
Montreal's waste water treatment plant, one of the largest in the world, handles the water from the city's homes, storm drains and snow-collection dump. It filters out solids, which are incinerated, and treats the water with chemicals before it's sent into the river, removing 70 per cent of the phosphorous, which promotes algae growth that clogs rivers and lakes. But it does little to extricate the bacteria that comes mainly from human excrement, as well as the pharmacological toxins like antidepressants, hormones and anti-inflammatories harmful to aquatic life. Swimming is not recommended for kilometres downstream of Montreal's outflow pipes.
Ozonation,( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/how-ozonation-works ) in which ozone gas is injected into the water to destroy bacteria, viruses and pharmacological toxins, has been found to kill 95 per cent of bacteria, the majority of viruses and 75 per cent of pharmacological and cosmetic-based pathogens, city officials say.
Proponents argue the technology was chosen in 2008 after years of study by independent experts. The ozonation centre represents the best environmental news in the waste-water sphere in 30 years, which was when the J.R.-Marcotte treatment plant was inaugurated and Montreal stopped dumping its raw sewage into the St. Lawrence. It will set the example for other municipalities to follow, officials said.
Critics counter that ozonation has not been used on this vast a scale for a reason - because it has been shown not to work in large urban setting - and that Montreal is being foolhardy( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/is-ozonation-the-right-solution-to-clean-montreals-waste-water ) risking more than a quarter of a billion dollars on an untested technology.
"It's taxpayers' money, and this has been going on forever," said Ronald Gehr, an assistant professor at McGill University with 25 years experience in waste water treatment who has been cautioning against the ozone factory since 2008. He was barred from doing research at the J.R.-Marcotte plant over his public statements after years of collaboration there, he said. Initial cost estimates for the plant given in 2005 were $200 million, he noted, and subsequently rose by 40 per cent.
"I feel they're being cagey, and I wonder what they have to hide," he said.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( http://twitter.com/renebruemmer )
Related
From 2015: Is ozonation the right solution to clean Montreal's waste water?( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/is-ozonation-the-right-solution-to-clean-montreals-waste-water )
How ozonation works( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/how-ozonation-works )
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette

