The Parti Québécois' would-be candidate in Maskinongé, Muguette Paillé, will no longer be running in the fall election, after a slew of her comments on far-right social media sites were brought to light Tuesday.
Although PQ Leader Jean-François Lisée called her the "voice of popular wisdom" only five days ago, his press attaché confirmed that after discussions relating to Paillé's controversial posts, she took herself out of the running.
Her comments, on sites like the Mouvement Républicain du Québec and Ensemble Nous Vaincrons, numbered in the hundreds and included repeated references to the Quebec premier as "Cheikh Couillard" and to the prime minister as "miniPET" (as in mini Pierre Elliott Trudeau), often calling him a "thief" and a "traitor."
Her online footprint also included vitriolic and hateful comments about Muslims.
On a closed Facebook group called Non à la Québécophobie et au racisme envers les Québécois (No to Quebecphobia and racism toward Quebecers), for example, she shared a fake news post May 2 about U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren that quoted the senator as saying "If women need to be raped by Muslims to prove our tolerance, so be it!"
Paillé replied: "So we could put her at the top of the list."
On MRQ, when one man characterized Muslims in Quebec as "invaders," she commented "Quebec for Quebecers of the Quebec nation."
Neither Lisée nor Paillé appeared wise or popular by Tuesday afternoon, when the short rise and fall of Paillé was complete.
Lisée, who recruited Paillé himself and tweeted his approval of her last Thursday, promptly erased that tweet Tuesday morning, as well as a Facebook post welcoming her to the fold.
Paillé, for her part, deactivated her personal Facebook page during the weekend, replacing it with a public page announcing her candidacy for the PQ - but not before some were able to sift through it and explore the links.
Xavier Camus, a philosophy professor at Collège Ahuntsic who investigates the far-right in his spare time, said it took him about five hours to get through Paillé's online comments to publish a synopsis of them( https://xaviercamus.com/ ) Tuesday morning.
He said Paillé, who had hoped to run in the last provincial election with Pauline Marois, was already well-known as a diehard PQ supporter.
But she was also a member of four far-right and/or nationalist groups whose membership often overlaps with that of La Meute and Storm Alliance.
"She doesn't have a structured ideology," Camus said. "She's what I would call an ordinary person influenced by anti-Islam discourse, and by others. ... But she also goes onto MRQ and NAQAREQ and tries to bring people to the PQ - to bring them voters and militants. But does she realize she's on a forum of the extreme right? They all think they're fighting "barbarians" and pedophiles. They don't see themselves as the extreme right."
Paillé, who is from Ste-Angèle-de-Prémont in the Mauricie region, about two hours east of Montreal, did not return phone calls Tuesday. Prior to last week, her only brush with fame was that she had asked a question to party leaders during a federal election debate in 2011: What were the leaders going to do to help people over 50 living in the regions find employment?
She was the talk of Quebec for days to come.
"There were discussions with Mme Paillé about certain ideas and comments on social media," said Lisée's press attaché, Bruno Pierre-Cyr, on Tuesday. "So she decided to leave us. ... There had been verifications made (of Paillé's online comments), but we were not aware of all of them."
csolyom@postmedia.com( mailto:csolyom@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/csolyom( https://twitter.com/ )
CREDIT: Catherine Solyom, Montreal Gazette