Despite sweat-inducing humidity, July has been an exceptionally dry month in Montreal.
By Sunday, Montreal received 0.4 mm of rain - a far cry from the monthly average of about 90 mm. By the same date last year, the island had received 50.6 mm of rain, according to historical data from Environment Canada.
This year's dryness is the result of cooler weather systems passing northwest of the city, said Simon Legault, a meteorologist with the agency. It's nothing more than a normal variation in weather patterns, he said.
"The general pattern of the atmosphere right now is causing the (low temperatures) to (travel) that way."
Legault offered last summer's cooler weather as an example of how different weather patterns affect temperatures and precipitation.
"That's a normal variable from year to year," he said.
Legault said that although Montreal hasn't received as much rain as it has in the past, that wasn't necessarily the case for the rest of the province.
"You can have the (expected) amount of rain in some places, but the next city won't get as much."
Legault also said Montreal will have warm weather through the end of the week, but it will dryer compared with the Monday humidex value of 38. The heat wave,( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/montreal-heat-wave-more-searing-weather-in-the-forecast-next-weekend ) which is said to have caused the deaths of 74 people in the province at the beginning of the month, is not related to the lack of rain, Legault said.
"We're just not seeing the systems that bring rain and colder temperatures."
Showers were expected overnight Monday and while they would not make up for the dry two weeks, "we're going to get a little bit closer to (the monthly average)," Legault said.
Montreal was expected to see between 10 and 20 mm of rain, with 30 to 40 mm possible in some parts of the region. The difference, Legault said, is because of breaks in the weather systems. The rain was expected help push the warmer air out of the region.
He also said the rain will "wash the air," reducing the smog in the atmosphere. During the heat wave at the beginning of the month, Environment Canada issued a smog warning for the city( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/smog-warning-issued-for-montreal-area-as-heat-wave-enters-last-gasp ). Smog is caused by high concentrations of pollutants in the atmosphere, made worse by warm weather. Legault said rain and wind are crucial to blow the pollutants out of the atmosphere and down to the ground.
Meanwhile, farmers in the province are hoping for rain( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec-farmers-are-hoping-for-rain-in-coming-days ). Marcel Groleau, president of the Union des producteurs agricoles, told Presse Canadienne on Friday that in certain regions, the situation is critical, notably in Lanaudière and the south of Quebec. The vegetable sector is especially affected.
kelitwin@postmedia.com( mailto:kelitwin@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/kelseylitwin( http://twitter.com/kelseylitwin )
Related
As second heat wave gains steam, 74 deaths are linked to Quebec weather( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/montreal-heat-wave-more-searing-weather-in-the-forecast-next-weekend )
Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed: Beating Montreal's heat wave is a community effort( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/fariha-naqvi-mohamed-beating-montreals-heat-wave-is-a-community-effort )
Quebec farmers are hoping for rain in coming days( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec-farmers-are-hoping-for-rain-in-coming-days )
CREDIT: Kelsey Litwin, Montreal Gazette

