This post was updated throughout the day on Thursday, June 25.
Questions/comments? rbruemmer@postmedia.com
Top updates
Decision to end daily COVID-19 updates not a coverup: Arruda
Quebec reopens almost all activities, sectors
Montreal reports 75 new cases since Tuesday
Police called to quell beach crowds in south of England
Opposition decries end of daily pandemic updates
Quebec reports 142 new cases, 7 more deaths
Atlantic premiers agree to open regional 'bubble'
Police injured breaking up outdoor party in South London
Montreal International Jazz Festival presents Jazz is in the Air
5:05 p.m. Chicago mayor offers free internet to 100,000 children
Mayor Lightfoot announces plan to provide free internet to 100,000 Chicago children after coronavirus reveals 'unacceptable disparities across the city'
- Robert Loerzel (@robertloerzel) June 25, 2020
4:45 p.m. Decision to end daily COVID-19 updates not a coverup: Arruda
"It's not a political decision, it's not a decision to hide anything," Quebec's public health director Horacio Arruda told reporters at Thursday's pandemic briefing in Montreal. "It's a decision to ensure a stability in the data."
See the full story by Phil Authier here.
4:40 p.m. Canada Post working to deliver COVID-19 backlog
A bottleneck causing delays in mail delivery is on the verge of getting much better, according to the union representing 50,000 Canada Post workers.
The COVID-19 pandemic and physical-distancing measures created a surge in online purchases and packages being delivered directly to people's homes.
See the story here.
4:30 p.m. Montreal seals off part of Bernard St. to traffic for shoppers, foodies
Montreal has closed off a section of Bernard St. to traffic in Outremont to help reopen restaurant terrasses and shops along the popular strip.
See our full story here.
2:40 p.m. Quebec reopens almost all activities, sectors
Quebec announced it is reopening all services and sectors today, with the exception of sleep-away camps, combat fighting and festivals that include large gatherings.
Bars, casinos, waterparks, spas and tourist accommodations all have the green light to reopen their doors, but will have to maintain two-metre social distancing rules.
Bar patrons will have to remain seated to limit people from circulating. No dancing will be allowed, and only people from the same households are supposed to sit together.
"You must make sure you will keep distance of two metres, keep hand hygiene and use a mask when you cannot maintain social distancing," public health director Horacio Arruda said. "This is very good news for Quebec."
Clubs can reopen as well, Arruda said, including strip clubs.
"But everyone has to keep a distance of two metres," he said.
Results in sectors like retail and schools where Quebec reopened already has been positive in terms of spreading of the virus, and the summer season is a good time to reopen, Arruda said. But he stressed that it's a conditional deconfinement.
"People must respect the two-metre rule. ... If not, we might pay dearly. Either this fall, or even before."
Large festivals or shows are at higher risk due to the singing, drinking and dancing they evoke. Sleep-away camps tend to have children living in close quarters and have been shown to spur outbreaks, he said.
On Quebec's decision to no longer publish daily updates on COVID-19 figures, Arruda said the drop in cases, deaths and hospitalizations allows the province to move to weekly updates, a practice he said was common in epidemiology because it gives a more realistic picture of how a pandemic is evolving is evolving in society.
Day-to-day data often includes an inflated number of cases or deaths because they sometimes bring in figures from previous weeks, causing false spikes, Arruda said.
If data shows an increase in cases "it's sure we will start posting daily numbers again."
"It's not a question of politics, its not a question of hiding anything, it's a question of giving more reliable figures," Arruda said.
Testing has fallen far below Quebec's stated goal of 14,000 a day in part because there are far fewer cases, so less people going to get tested. The health ministry is recalibrating its protocols regarding testing, looking at testing in hospitals and residents of institutions.
Montreal public health director Mylène Drouin said public health officials are focussing on putting out "small fires," working quickly to detect outbreaks and quickly perform contact tracing to find anyone who might have been infected.
Asked if the reopenings could cause a surge, Drouin said it's likely there will be more cases, but "we won't go back to where we were in February." With lower figures, health officials are better able to control the situation, she said. If the government sees ominous signs, it won't hesitate to shut sectors.
Arruda said he is "very preoccupied" by the idea of reopening the border with the United States, given the conditions there, particularly on the east coast, where are flocking to beaches to escape the heat, and in Florida, where Quebecers like to go. Quebec would be hesitant to allow travel there, he said.
In response to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's statement that certain provinces failed at caring for their elderly, Arruda said: "It's clear, I cannot say there was not a certain failure regarding the number of people who have died." The causes are complex, and included a "bombardment" of travellers before the borders closed, how services for the elderly were organized, a labour and equipment shortage.
"No one can saw we are happy with what happened in our seniors centres," he said. But work has been done to improve staffing and safety.
2:15 p.m. Montreal reports 75 new cases since Tuesday
Montreal's public health department reported on Thursday that the city has seen a total of 27,149 COVID-19 cases, a rise of 75 since Tuesday.
The total death toll for the city now stands at 3,342, a rise of 11 from Tuesday.
There are 39 CHSLDs and seniors' homes with at least one case of COVID-19.
12:50 p.m. Major incident declared as people flock to England's south coast
More on the masses escaping the heat wave in England by driving to the beaches in the south, from the Guardian:
"A major incident was declared after tens of thousands of people defied pleas to stay away and descended in their droves on beaches in Bournemouth and other stretches of the Dorset coast.
"The local authority said it was forced to instigate a multi-agency emergency response to tackle over-crowding on the beaches, traffic gridlock and violence. Security guards had to be used to protect refuse collection teams.
"Visitors arrived in huge volumes resulting in widespread illegal parking, gridlock on roads, excessive waste, antisocial behaviour including excessive drinking and fights and prohibited overnight camping.
"Some motorists had to queue for two hours to get into Bournemouth and car parks were full by 9 a.m. on Thursday."
See the full story here
Huge crowds on England's south coast as people flock to beaches - video
- The Guardian (@guardian) June 25, 2020
12:20 p.m. Half-million sunbathers at U.K. beach; police called
'MAJOR INCIDENT' declared in BOURNEMOUTH - pls stay away.
With 1/2 million visitors in Dorset, roads are gridlocked, hindering emergency vehicles & beaches are full - with Dispersal Orders on both piers.
I've asked Police Minister to dispatch additional police if Dorset requests
- Tobias Ellwood MP (@Tobias_Ellwood) June 25, 2020
12:05 p.m. Opposition parties decry end of daily pandemic updates
Opposition politicians are criticizing the health ministry for its decision to end its daily updates on pandemic figures, saying it shows a lack of transparency at a time when the coronavirus is still lurking in the province.
"Totally incomprehensible," said Liberal leader Dominique Anglade.
Parti Québécois leader Pascal Bérubé called on the new health minister, Christian Dubé, to explain himself.
See our full story here by Phil Authier.
11:45 a.m. N.D.G.'s Pick Thai restaurant stays OR clean
Prior to opening the popular Pick Thai restaurant near the Vendôme métro station seven years ago, Vilay Douangpanya worked as a recovery-room nurse at the Jewish General Hospital for 14 years.
She brings that hospital-inspired passion for cleanliness to her restaurant. In the midst of a pandemic, it helps.
See Bill Brownstein's full story here.
Vilay Douangpanya puts at least as much focus on cleanliness as she does on her acclaimed cuisine at Pick Thai.
11:20 a.m. Quebec reports 142 new cases, 7 more deaths
Quebec registered 142 new cases of COVID-19 in the last 24 hours, bringing the total number of people infected to 55,079.
The health ministry noted seven new deaths, six that occurred in the last 24 hours and one that came before June 17. It brings the death toll to 5,448.
The number of people in hospital with COVID-19-related illnesses dropped by 13, to 487. Of those, 50 are in intensive care, a reduction of two.
The ministry noted that this will be its last daily update of numbers. As of next week, the government will give figures on a weekly basis. The next will come on July 2.
The province's public health research institute (INSPQ) had said it would continue to publish daily updates Monday to Friday.
But on Thursday morning, the INSPQ changed its message, saying in a press release that it, too, would only publish a weekly update.
The decision to end the daily updates has been met with vocal opposition, with critics saying they are necessary for epidemiologists to be able to track the disease as the threat of a second wave hovers.
#COVID19 - Au Québec, la situation est la suivante:
8 227 prélèvements effectués le 23 juin
7 917 analyses réalisées le 23 juin
524 578 cas négatifs le 24 juin
55 079 cas confirmés le 24 juin
Pour en savoir plus sur la situation au Québec:
- Santé Québec (@sante_qc) June 25, 2020
11:10 a.m. Why some cities get ravaged and others don't
Canada's COVID-19 crisis has been mostly confined to its two largest cities, with two-thirds of confirmed cases in Toronto and Montreal.
New research suggests that certain drivers, such as density and the percentage of population living in nursing homes, predict which cities are the hardest hit.
"What we find is that large metropolis are vulnerable mainly for two reasons. First, they are places with a dense way of life. Second, in large urban areas it is very hard to create a disease-free bubble because there is always inflow and outflow," said Klaus Desmet, an economist at Southern Methodist University, Texas.
See the full story here.
11:00 a.m. Selley: Why are we giving Canadian politicians a free pass on COVID-19?
"It is one of the strangest aspects of Ontario's and Quebec's COVID-19 nightmares that politicians have seemed almost entirely immune from criticism," columnist Chris Selley writes.
Were it not for Quebec, Ontario would be Canada's worst performer, with almost three times as many deaths as the next-worst provinces. Were it not for Andorra, Belgium and San Marino, Quebec's COVID-19 death rate would be higher than any nation state in the world.
Despite that, approval ratings for the premiers of Quebec and Ontario have soared.
See his full column here.
10:55 a.m. Atlantic premiers agree to open regional 'bubble'
The four Atlantic provinces announced plans to ease travel restrictions in the region, allowing Atlantic Canadians to travel within the region without having to self-isolate, starting July 3.
Visitors from outside the region will still be required to self-isolate for two weeks.
See the full story here.
10:45 a.m. Tennis star Novak Djokovic tests positive, apologizes after flouting COVID-19 rules
Tennis great Novak Djokovic apologized for disregarding social distancing rules during a tournament in Croatia, after he and his wife tested positive for COVID-19.
The Serbian athlete has been heavily criticized for hosting the tournament amid a pandemic, and partying in a nightclub with dozens of others. Several people have tested positive. Djokovic, a self-proclaimed anti-vaxxer, said he wold remain in self-isolation for 14 days.
See our full story here.
Tennis player Nick Kyrgios was among several to criticize Djokovic, tweeting video of the player dancing in a nightclub.
Prayers up to all the players that have contracted Covid - 19. Don't @ me for anything I've done that has been 'irresponsible' or classified as 'stupidity' - this takes the cake.
- Nicholas Kyrgios (@NickKyrgios) June 23, 2020
10:35 a.m. IMF predicts deep recession, slow recovery
Having already warned of the biggest slump since the Great Depression, the International Monetary Fund downgraded its outlook for the world economy, projecting a significantly deeper recession and slower recovery than it anticipated just two months ago.
It now expects global GDP to shrink 4.9 per cent this year, more than the 3 per cent it predicted in April. For 2021, it forecasts growth of 5.4 per cent, down from 5.8 per cent.
See our full story here.
10:30 a.m. Nurse infected with COVID-19 reflects on work at CHSLD
Else Leon volunteered to work at a CHSLD in Île-Bizard in May. In June, she tested positive. She spoke to the Montreal Gazette about her decision to sign up, her illness, and what it was like to work in an infected long-term care centre.
See the story here by Kathryn Greenaway.
"I noticed a slight cough at work," says nurse Else Leon, who tested positive for COVID-19 after volunteering to work at CHSLD Denis-Benjamin-Viger in Île-Bizard. "By the time I got home, I had a bad headache. The next morning, I was sneezing and coughing. The symptoms weren't typical. I didn't have a fever."
10:15 a.m. Anglade blasts CAQ for stopping daily publication of COVID-19 numbers
Liberal opposition leader Dominique Anglade took to Twitter to lambaste the Coalition Avenir Québec government for its decision to stop publishing daily numbers compiled by the health ministry on the COVID-19 pandemic.
On Wednesday, a provincial holiday, the government announced in a press release it would publish its final daily tally of COVID-19 cases Thursday, moving to a weekly publication.
The province's public health research institute (INSPQ) had said it would continue to publish daily updates Monday to Friday.
But on Thursday morning, the INSPQ suddenly changed its message, saying in a press release that it, too, would only publish a weekly update.
"This decision to not inform the public on the pandemic situation is totally incomprehensible," Anglade writes. "Everywhere in the world, we are seeing a second wave. ... Meanwhile, in Quebec, we have made the choice for less transparency when we need the opposite.
"The government must reverse this decision!"
Pendant ce temps au Québec, on fait le choix de moins de transparence quand il faudrait faire tout le contraire.
Le gouvernement doit revenir sur cette décision ! (2/2)#PolQc #Assnat #PLQ
- Dominique Anglade ?? (@DomAnglade) June 25, 2020
9:55 a.m. 22 police officers injured breaking up illegal party in South London
At least 22 police officers were injured in South London on Wednesday night as they tried to disperse crowds that had gathered for an illegal outdoor party in defiance of coronavirus restrictions, the police said
- The New York Times (@nytimes) June 25, 2020
9:20 a.m. Montreal International Jazz Festival presents Jazz is in the Air
With the Jazz Festival cancelled for the first time in four decades, presenters are instead putting on Jazz Is in the Air, a free online event, with live-streamed and pre-recorded performances.
There will also be recordings of classic concerts by Oscar Peterson and Oliver Jones, Jaco Pastorius, Miles Davis and Sarah Vaughan.
It runs from Saturday to Tuesday at montrealjazzfest.com
See the full story here by T'Cha Dunlevy.
9:15 a.m. Seven testing centres open in Montreal today
Montrealers can be tested at free screening clinics across the island.
They are for people who 1) have symptoms or 2) don't have symptoms but have been in close contact with someone who has received a positive COVID-19 test result.
Today, seven testing centres are available across Montreal Island. Some require appointments.
8:45 a.m. Across Canada, almost 8,500 deaths
As of 4 a.m., there were 102,242 cases in Canada, and 8,484 deaths. A total of 65,087 have recovered.
The breakdown by province and territory:
Quebec: 54,937 (5,441 deaths, 23,710 resolved)
Ontario: 34,016 (2,631 deaths, 29,336 resolved)
Alberta: 7,825 (including 153 deaths, 7,134 resolved)
British Columbia: 2,849 (171 deaths, 2,516 resolved)
Nova Scotia: 1,061 (63 deaths, 998 resolved)
Saskatchewan: 757 (13 deaths, 643 resolved)
Manitoba: 304 (7 deaths, 293 resolved), 11 presumptive
Newfoundland and Labrador: 261 (3 deaths, 258 resolved)
New Brunswick: 165 (2 deaths, 143 resolved)
Prince Edward Island: 27 (27 resolved)
Repatriated Canadians: 13 cases (13 resolved)
Yukon: 11 cases (11 resolved)
Northwest Territories: 5 cases (including 5 resolved)
Nunavut: No confirmed cases
8:30 a.m. What's open and closed in Montreal
We are constantly updating our list of what is open and closed in Montreal
8:30 a.m. Nightly newsletter
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
rbruemmer@postmedia.com
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
A timeline of the novel coronavirus in Quebec

