QUEBEC - When Premier François Legault talks about his accomplishments in office, one word inevitably pops up: pride.
He's proud to be premier and thinks he's been able to instil the same feeling in Quebecers - ending a period of sullenness.
"The most important thing for me is having respected our promises, especially when it comes to the pocketbooks of Quebecers," Legault told The Montreal Gazette last week as he arrived for question period.
"We started to reduce school taxes, we started to increase family allowances for children. We will continue down this path.
"I also think Quebecers believe we understand their concerns, they are satisfied with Bill 21 and that we respect their values, such as secularism. So Quebecers are experiencing a certain pride and I am proud of that."
As the government marks one year since the Coalition Avenir Québec made history by breaking the Liberal and Parti Québécois stranglehold on power for 40 years and winning the Oct. 1, 2018, election, the mood is calm and confident.
The party has scheduled a general council meeting Nov. 2, where the anniversary will certainly be celebrated by the rank-and-file, but so far nothing special is on the calendar to mark the event.
"It's business as usual," said Legault's press aide, Ewan Sauves.
The comment reflects Legault's pragmatic, business-like approach to governing; where what's important is boosting the economy, improving health and education and above all ticking election promises off his list.
In some cases, the promises are "adjusted" versions of the original, but Legault nevertheless says he's sticking to his plan.
Take Legault's line last Thursday that a government can't go wrong by consulting the people in a referendum on the issue of electoral reform. It was not in the original CAQ playbook.
"It's a big political pirouette," veteran Le Soleil columnist Jean-Marc Salvet wrote Thursday( https://www.lesoleil.com/chroniques/jean-marc-salvet/pilule-doree-et-pirouette-politique-a-la-caq-6e00578be17c14ee6ebfb5625cf1aa1c ).
Indeed, critics say the CAQ government's biggest weakness is that it appears to be making it up as it goes along, improvising on the details behind ideas when the heat is on.
Last week, Legault made headlines when he declared the plan to build a $4-billion tunnel between Quebec City and Lévis to ease traffic congestion is a green solution.
"I want Quebec to be the place in the world that has the most electric cars," he told the National Assembly. "But for those electric cars to circulate, we need roads, we need connectors."
Legault, nevertheless, has a big advantage. With the opposition parties in disarray and the economy booming, he is still surfing on his enormous popularity, confirmed most recently in a Forum Research poll( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebec-premier-francois-legault-is-in-the-political-drivers-seat-poll ) for the Montreal Gazette.
It showed Legault in the political driver's seat( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/analysis-in-the-drivers-seat-legault-tells-quebecers-to-brace-for-change ) - particularly with francophone voters - with four out of 10 Quebecers supporting his government.
On Friday, the Angus Reid Institute( https://mailchi.mp/angusreid/premiers-performance-legault-moe-enjoy-highest-job-approval-ford-mcneil-round-out-bottom-ranks-5sr4dl53lp?e=84c5555b13 ) again put Legault at the top of the list among premiers in Canada as far as his approval rating goes.
It's true Legault and his government have made mistakes, but - at least on the big things - Legault admits them and moves on. For now, anyway, Quebecers seem to accept his style of operating because unlike some of his predecessors he does not dither.
A Léger poll published Saturday( https://www.journaldequebec.com/2019/09/28/un-score-assez-exceptionnel ) indicated 64 per cent of Quebecers are satisfied with the work of the CAQ government.
"It's hard to do better," said Léger executive vice-president Christian Bourque.
CAQ insiders say it has profited from the fact Quebecers are than more than happy to dump their old federalist-sovereignist labels after so many years. The result is that the party has cornered the market on the francophone nationalist vote.
"We forget this is the first time a brand new political party governs Quebec since 1976," said Eric Montigny, a political science professor at the Université Laval.
"What strikes me is that it has arrived in office and is governing in an orderly fashion. It's a government that was hyperactive in its first year. And its honeymoon is continuing."
Highlights of the CAQ government's first year A hyperactive government
One of the biggest achievements of the CAQ government has been its ability to implement change, which amounts to a mountain of cabinet and government decisions coupled with an avalanche of new legislation.
When the legislature adjourned in June, the government had presented 30 separate pieces of legislation, adopting 14. The strategy was to dispense with its two most controversial ideas - Bill 9 reforming the immigration system( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/immigration-reform-bill-voted-into-law-by-caq-government-despite-opposition ) and Bill 21 on state secularism( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebec-passes-secularism-law-after-marathon-session ) - early in the mandate.
Several remain to be adopted, including Bill 2, increasing the legal age to consume cannabis from 18 to 21.
In the two weeks that the legislature has been sitting this fall( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/analysis-in-the-drivers-seat-legault-tells-quebecers-to-brace-for-change ), the CAQ tabled another half-dozen pieces of legislation, including Bill 39 reforming the electoral system( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebecers-will-vote-on-electoral-reform-in-a-referendum-in-2022 ). It includes plans for a referendum at the same time as the 2022 election.
The government also has respected promises to ease the finances of Quebec's taxpayers, lowering school taxes and increasing family allowance payments for children. There will be more goodies in November when Finance Minister Eric Girard - sitting on a surplus of $4.3 billion - tables his second economic update.
Legault has already made it clear he wants to give any extra money back to taxpayers and not to the province's unions( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/premier-legault-warns-unions-they-wont-get-quebecs-surplus-cash ) seeking wage increases.
Tough times for minorities
Legault often tells the National Assembly's small band of English media reporters that he hopes the English-speaking community one day will start feeling good about the CAQ after the snubbing it in 2018.
Relations with minorities and the leadership of the community( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/majority-rules-mentality-a-cause-for-anglophone-fears-qcgn-says ) in particular have been a CAQ blind spot throughout the first year - creating the widespread impression the government lacks empathy.
Despite naming Christopher Skeete( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/caq-pledges-to-protect-rights-of-quebecs-english-speaking-communities ) parliamentary assistant to the premier for relations with English-speaking Quebecers, many anglophones can't get past Legault's Parti Québécois past. Things like the forced transfer of anglophone schools to the francophone network( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/quebec-orders-the-transfer-of-two-anglo-schools-to-cspi ) last June and bills 9 and 21 have not helped.
A Léger poll published in September( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/anglophones-have-little-trust-in-caq-government-poll-suggests ) indicated the majority of English-speaking Quebecers feel the CAQ does not understand their concerns, and two-thirds have little trust in the government.
"There have been a series of government initiatives that are very worrying to the community," said Geoffrey Chambers, president of the Quebec Community Groups Network.
It's not over. On Tuesday, Education Minister Jean-François Roberge will table legislation to transform Quebec's 72 school boards - including the nine anglophone boards - into service centres despite the staunch opposition of the community.
As a concession to try to patch up relations, Roberge's bill - as reported by The Montreal Gazette in September( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/caq-offers-compromise-anglos-can-still-hold-school-elections ) - will include a compromise and allow the English boards to continue to hold elections of school board administrators, something the francophone system will lose.
"We are aware there is a perception we don't care as much about the minority," a top government official said Friday. "I think on school boards we have taken into account the historic place of the anglophone community.
"We are not insensitive to the community's demands. They have not fallen on deaf ears. We care."
Troubled waters
One of the government's early gaffes was fumbling after the tragic death of a seven-year-old girl in Granby( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/lionel-carmant-outraged-by-seven-year-old-girls-death-in-granby ), when the province's youth protection system failed to protect her.
Legault was obliged to personally step in when it became clear his junior health minister, Lionel Carmant, a man with no political experience, was in over his head.
That incident sparked the government's decision in May to create a roaming commission to probe the system( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/legault-announces-laurent-commission-in-wake-of-granby-childs-death ). Carmant has been assigned some veteran political handlers to help him.
It's a long way back in January, but Legault also replaced his first choice as environment minister, MarieChantal Chassé( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/francois-legault-turfs-controversial-environment-minister ), who he conceded was not ready to handle the high-profile cabinet post. She was replaced by CAQ party veteran Benoît Charette.
And true to his habit of rewarding his performing ministers with yet more work, Legault in August stripped struggling Culture and Communications Minister Nathalie Roy( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/francois-legault-transfers-language-file-to-jolin-barrette-in-cabinet-shuffle ) of the language file to hand it to Simon Jolin-Barrette, who piloted Bills 9 and 21.
Nothing quite tops the antics of Agriculture Minister André Lamontagne, who, in January, boasted he had personally fired whistleblower Louis Robert, a ministry agronomist who warned of a potential conflict of interest between pesticide manufacturers and the Centre de recherche sur les grains.
Again, Legault had to step in and apologize( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/legault-offers-formal-apology-to-fired-whistleblower ). Robert has been rehired.
Place in Canada
For a former sovereignist, Legault has thrived surprisingly well in his role representing Quebec in the federation even though he still will not say out loud that he is a proud Canadian( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/legault-roasted-for-refusing-to-say-he-is-a-proud-canadian-during-debate ). He did not attend any Canada Day events this year.
With the exception of the incident in December where he referred to Alberta oil as dirty energy( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/legault-dismisses-alberta-backlash-over-dirty-energy-comment ), he has avoided dustups. He also made a number of forays into the United States and Ontario in his role as Hydro-Québec's diplomatic export salesman.
It took the federal election to draw out how Legault really sees Quebec's future in the federation. In presenting his grocery list of demands to the federal candidates, Legault spelled out his nationalist agenda( https://montrealgazette.com/news/national/election-2019/premier-legault-says-he-wants-quebec-respected-in-federation ) and desire to recoup more powers from the federal government.
"They accept the same (federal) regime as the Liberal Party," interim PQ leader Pascal Bérubé said in reaction. "The only difference is they wave the flag more often."
Pulling on the green jeans
For a party that campaigned in 2018 with virtually no environmental or climate-change platform, the first year has been a catchup operation, starting with Legault's inaugural address, where he said he got the message on the issue.
A year later, his tone is completely different.
"I think we have to salute young people like (ecologist) Greta Thunberg( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-climate-march-we-are-the-change-greta-thunberg-tells-throng ), who tells the citizens of the world we cannot do nothing," Legault told reporters last week. "The situation is alarming, its worrisome. If we do nothing, the survival of the planet is at stake and that's not a small matter."
What will come of it? The opposition remains skeptical that the government will take concrete actions, but the CAQ is promising an action plan( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/legault-may-not-be-a-climate-skeptic-but-hes-climate-inactive-liberals-charge ) for early in the new year.
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/philipauthier( http://Twitter.com/philipauthier )

