"Vive l'indépendance du Québec!"
Manon Massé delivered that line with a wink and a smile Friday as she prepared to meet with dairy farmers over the future of supply management in Canada.
One of the sticking points in negotiations for a new version of the North American Free Trade Agreement could deliver a blow to the province's dairy industry. The United States wants Canada to do away with supply management - a policy that bolsters 120,000 jobs in Quebec's agricultural sector.
Massé, the Québec solidaire co-spokesperson, says this just proves that federalism isn't working for Quebecers.
"When we're not an independent nation, we don't have a seat at the table - it's that simple," said Massé. "Prime Minister (Justin) Trudeau has no idea how peeved the people of Quebec will be if this goes forward."
Representatives from Quebec's four major parties were in Longueuil( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-elections-couillard-lisee-and-masse-join-to-support-quebec-farmers ) Friday to meet with the province's farming lobby and show a united front in favour of supply management.
It was a fleeting moment of solidarity during an otherwise raucous election campaign.
Quebec produces about 50 per cent of Canada's dairy, and its agricultural sector is roughly the size of Ontario's automotive industry. To oppose supply management would be political suicide, in other words.
But the conversation also breathes life into the argument that Ottawa has the power to sell out Quebec farmers at the negotiating table, said Parti Québécois Leader Jean-François Lisée.
NAFTA talks are ramping up and there could be a new agreement as of Friday. What appears to be at play right now is a deal that would establish minimum wage for Mexican auto workers - a net benefit for the U.S. and Ontario - but one that could also open Quebec's markets to a flood of foreign dairy products.
"Quebec has been abandoned again, and now we have to present a united front to make sure Canada doesn't abandon us again," said Lisée. "If to win a better trade deal for Ontario (the prime minister) abandons Quebec, he'll do it. That's what he wants."
Liberal Leader Philippe Couillard said Friday that, if re-elected, his government would not ratify any agreement that isn't approved by Quebec's dairy farmers. But given that trade deals are negotiated between countries, there's little legislative weight behind this threat.
Lisée pointed to the Trans-Pacific Partnership and other trade deals that, he claims, put the interests of Alberta beef farmers and British Columbia ahead of Quebec.
"If federalism works, then Alberta, the West Coast and Quebec are all benefiting equally from these trade deals," he said. "But we aren't."
Lisée and Massé's poll numbers have them trailing the Liberals and Coalition Avenir Québec by a wide margin. And opinion surveys suggest Quebec sovereignty is less popular now than it has been in generations.
But Lisée has also suggested that the right set of external factors - like a blow to the dairy sector - could cause Quebecers to reconsider that stance.
Marcel Groleau, the head of the Union des producteurs agricoles, said supply management is the backbone of the economy in many regions.
"In my community, in the 'rangs' where we live, five farms support 12 families," he said. "That's supply management. It's our way of life."
ccurtis@postmedia.com( mailto:ccurtis@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/titocurtis( http://twitter.com/titocurtis )
Related
Read more of our 2018 Quebec election coverage right here( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-elections )
Can't get enough of Quebec politics? Join our Facebook group( https://www.facebook.com/groups/TheQuebecBureau/ )
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

