Good morning and welcome to the provincial budget-day edition of While You Were Sleeping. You can follow our pre-budget stories and coverage of the budget being handed down this afternoon right here( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/quebec-politics ).
It's icy on some sidewalks and roadways, so be careful!( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-dont-forget-the-umbrella ) Environment Canada issued a freezing-rain warning just before 5 a.m. that could last through the morning. The rain will continue through the evening.
C.D.N.-N.D.G. mayor Sue Montgomery suspends borough director days after her political attaché quit( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/suspension-resignation-in-montgomerys-office ): Unrest continues in the borough office as mayor Sue Montgomery has suspended her borough director, while her press attaché has resigned, the Montreal Gazette has learned. The newspaper has also learned that Montgomery is seeking an injunction in Quebec Superior Court against the city of Montreal in connection with an internal city report alleging that her chief of staff, Annalisa Harris, harassed two civil servants in her office. Montgomery will ask the court to order the city of Montreal to hand over a report on the alleged harassment by the city's comptroller general, Alain Bond. She will also argue that Bond overstepped his authority by placing a civil servant in her office on a paid leave of absence as a result of the harassment report. By "his actions, the comptroller general of the city of Montreal, Mr. Alain Bond, is overstepping his powers and disturbing the operations of the borough of Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce," the injunction request says. Read Marian Scott's full story right here( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/suspension-resignation-in-montgomerys-office ).
Plane carrying Canadians from Grand Princess cruise ship arrives in Canada: A plane carrying Canadians who were on a cruise ship with a cluster of novel coronavirus cases arrived back in Canada this morning. The government-chartered aircraft landed at Canadian Forces Base Trenton, in Ontario, where the passengers will spend two-weeks in quarantine. The exact number of Canadians on the flight was unknown because they had to pass a screening process before being allowed to board the flight. There were 237 Canadians among the 3,500 passengers and crew on board the Grand Princess cruise ship.
Futures rebound after oil gains on stimulus hopes: After yesterday's volatility, Canada's main stock index futures rebounded on Tuesday as oil prices gained on hopes of economic stimulus and possible OPEC talks. March futures on the S&P/TSX index were up 4.57 per cent at 7 a.m. ET. The Toronto Stock Exchange's S&P/TSX index closed down 10.27 per cent at 14,514.24 on Monday, its biggest drop since the October 1987 stock market crash. The recovery in oil prices comes a day after their biggest rout in nearly 30 years, as investors eyed the possibility of economic stimulus and Russia signalled that talks with OPEC remained possible. Dow Jones Industrial Average e-mini futures were up 4.14 per cent at 7 a.m. ET, while S&P 500 e-mini futures were up 4.34 per cent and Nasdaq 100 e-mini futures were up 4.54 per cent.
Source: Montreal Gazette, Canadian Press, Reuters
More news anytime at montrealgazette.com( https://montrealgazette.com/ ) and watch for our coverage as the Habs host the Nashville Predators( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/hockey-inside-out/nashville-predators-at-canadiens-five-things-you-should-know-2 ), with game time set for 7 p.m.



