Will we still be playing shinny 30 years from now?
That's far from certain, a depressing thought for countless Canadians who love to play hockey on outdoor rinks across the country.
In Montreal, this winter's wacky weather has played havoc with the state of our ice rinks, while the effects of global warming are making for shorter outdoor hockey seasons, according to researchers.
But it's not just the weather. Kids today seem to have less time for free-form, spontaneous play like shinny, whether because they are spending more time in organized sports or sitting in front of their screens at home.
"It's really sad," said Michael Pasternak, a technical writer and enthusiastic amateur hockey player who lives in Pointe-Claire. "I live right behind a rink and I look out and so often the rink is empty. There are no kids on it.
"When I was a kid growing up on the South Shore, on a weekend day, the rink was full of kids. The big kids going length-wise and the little kids having their game going on cross-wise. Whereas nowadays, it's not like that at all.
"The weather in the last couple of years hasn't helped. The weather's been really crappy. But the other thing is organized sports. Kids are in (hockey) and they're practicing multiple times a week indoors. They're guaranteed good ice. They don't have to shovel it. ... So it's not like when I was a kid."
Shinny at N.D.G. Park. The effects of global warming are making for shorter outdoor hockey seasons, according to researchers.
Two Montreal professors -Damon Matthews from Concordia and Lawrence Mysak from McGill - have studied the impact of climate change on outdoor hockey in Canada. Their 2012 research, which looked at weather data from 1951 to 2006, concluded that if the skating season continues to shrink, outdoor shinny in southern Canada may disappear within a few decades.
"Everything depends on how quickly we are able to turn things around on the mitigation side of things," said Matthews, who teaches in Concordia's department of geography, planning and environment. "There is still a window to avoid things like skating being a thing of the past. But it's a rapidly closing window.
"Given the direction we're going now, yes, I'd say I'd give it a few decades. ... The skating season is going to shrink and eventually disappear, and that will happen within my lifetime. I'd bet on it."
That would be a sad day for those who live for lacing up, grabbing their stick and doing their best imitation of Sidney Crosby on an al fresco rink.
Crosby himself turned up unannounced at an outdoor rink in Mont-Tremblant one morning last month( http://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/need-some-company-sidney-crosby-surprises-teen-playing-outdoor-hockey/wcm/cd9b46fd-b292-4636-9992-6a4168e41231 ), spending an hour practising his moves with a pleasantly surprised teenage junior AA player in a quintessentially Canadian moment that took social media by storm.
Kids today seem to have less time for free-form, spontaneous play, whether because they are spending more time in organized sports or sitting in front of their screens at home.
Craig Klinkhoff, who works at the Sherbrooke St. W. Alan Klinkhoff Gallery founded by his father, says he quit playing competitive indoor hockey when he was 12 because he was sick of the regimented approach of city hockey teams. But he kept right on playing outdoors.
"It's the informal nature of it," Klinkhoff said. "It doesn't matter who's there, whether it's close friends or strangers. You show up at a random rink where there are people you may or may not recognize and you can join in the game.
"Without spoken rules or written rules, everyone conforms to this amazing game. Everyone is just having a great time. People of all ages and abilities all facing the same challenges, of navigating an unpredictable ice surface.
"People come and go throughout the game. You make friends. It allows friends and strangers to get together over this wonderful game. It doesn't matter how old or how experienced you are. Everyone just shows up and has fun on their own terms for as long as they want."
Daniel Sanger, a Projet Montréal staffer who spends some serious time on outdoor rinks throughout the Plateau, also walked away from organized hockey as a teenager because he felt coaches, parents and players were taking the game way too seriously.
"That's why I like it for kids," Sanger said. "It's something people don't really understand the importance of. The dynamic is you throw the sticks in the middle. Then they organize it themselves rather than having an adult tell them what to do.
"So often with kids, whether it's school or organized sports activities, it's always about the adult telling them what to do. This is a case where it's the kids who are responsible for themselves."
But it's not just for kids. It's also a way for adults to take a breather from the daily grind.
"I put my skates on in my mud room and I clomp through my backyard snow, because I have a gate to the park, and I just hop the boards and I'm at centre ice," Pasternak of Pointe-Claire said. "I can see whoever is there from my living room. My wife switches on The Bachelor and I say, 'I'm going for a skate.'
"I love the fact that it's a freewheeling outdoor game and you're free to try all kinds of little moves that you wouldn't necessarily try in (an indoor) game because you're trying to win the game. Whereas in outdoor hockey, you're just trying to have fun and move the puck and try that little trick that you never seem to get - like the toe-drag or the shoulder fake or whatever it is. You wouldn't do it in a game because you're supposed to make the pass to the guy who's open. Whereas in shinny, it's a lot more forgiving."
That is one of the keys to understanding the appeal of outdoor hockey. There are no refs and no written rules, and yet it is more civilized than indoor beer-league hockey where there can sometimes be a little too much competition and some nastiness.
There are no refs or written rules in outdoor hockey, and yet it is more civilized than indoor beer leagues that can get overly competitive and even nasty.
"Somehow, despite how unorganized it is and how unfamiliar everyone can be with one and other, it still works," Klinkhoff said.
"The civility also extends to how different players react to other players of different calibres. When the young boy or girl gets the puck, and they haven't touched it very much, then you let them skate with it, and there's a sense of joy and fun that comes with that. Everyone understands that everyone has a different role."
In fact, in part because typically there are no goalies, goals often come fast and furious, and people usually lose track of who's winning.
"It's an absolute thing of beauty playing pick-up hockey because it's so creative," Sanger said. "It's almost like a jam session in music. ...
"Do you know people who keep track of the score in pick-up hockey? Often enough, if you're one of the better players, you're not going to score the easy goals. You'll always try to make it more interesting. ...
"It's a sublime experience, to be outside on a rink on a winter night. Think of the sounds. Of the puck on the boards. The skate blade in the ice. Combined with the evening quiet."
Magic. But for how much longer?
bkelly@postmedia.com( mailto:bkelly@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/brendanshowbiz( http://www.twitter.com/brendanshowbiz )
CREDIT: Brendan Kelly, Montreal Gazette

