There were protests, Wednesday, as Robert Lepage prepared to unveil his reworked version of SLAV in Sherbrooke. But the uproar was of a different type than that which greeted the production back in June, when it was unveiled as part of the Montreal International Jazz Festival and cancelled after just three performances( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepages-controversial-play-about-indigenous-people-kanata-has-been-cancelled ).
It turns out Wednesday's protests weren't directed at Lepage, singer Betty Bonifassi, or their "theatrical odyssey based on slave songs;" but rather at Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, who was in town on official business.
After a long, hot summer during which the outcry surrounding SLAV engulfed the entire province, and following which Lepage and Bonifassi did their best to make it all fade away, there was little desire on any side to dust off the old cultural appropriation debate( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/dunlevy-post-slav-and-kanata-lets-talk-about-cultural-appropriation ).
So launching the show anew in the dead of winter, a couple hours drive from Montreal, must have seemed like a safe bet. Lepage laid the groundwork in late December, releasing a statement( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepage-admits-to-clumsiness-ahead-of-slav-relaunch ) announcing that he had met with members of the black community, admitting that he had made mistakes, and stating that he had revised his controversial production with their input.
In SLAV, two women trace Estelle's lineage on her mom's side back to a black slave who fled captivity.
The rejigged SLAV was performed at Université de Sherbrooke's Centre Culturel Wednesday night, the first of a handful of dates around the province this winter. The major differences: no more white women picking cotton, for one; and a clearer and more conscientious distribution of actors along racial lines.
Bonifassi was again joined by six female backup singers. Last time only two of them were women of colour; that number increased to three with the welcome addition of Tracy Marcelin, who enlivened the show with her singing and guitar playing, alongside the returning Sharon James and Kattia Thony. (The cast was filled out by Estelle Richard, Élisabeth Sirois and Audrée Southière.)
A weary and wary-looking Bonifassi emerged to start things off. "Bonsoir," she said, dressed in black and leaning on a cane - possibly a lingering consequence of the fall in which she broke her ankle( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/two-performances-of-controversial-show-slav-cancelled-due-to-singers-broken-ankle-jazz-fest-says ) last summer, forcing the show's cancellation.
She repeated the story of her Italian-Serbian-French background, leading into the Slavic roots of the word slave. She then professed her longstanding "obsession" with slave songs, and declared the evening an homage to the music that emerged from this "long, painful chapter in history."
SLAV's loose narrative revolves around Kattia and her blond friend Estelle (Richard), who go on a journey from Quebec to the deep south.
Bonifassi has released two solo albums of these songs: funky updates of field recordings made by ethnomusicologist Alan Lomax in the early 1900s, that are the basis for this show.
The Baltic hymn that opened the original production has been nixed, and so the night began with James singing the bruised blues number Early in the Morning, joined by Thony and Marcelin against a projected backdrop of cotton fields. Two white actresses emerged to help them process the day's yield, but this time they were dressed in blue with white bonnets, to set them apart from the slaves. Other problematic details have been cleaned up in similar ways.
The show's loose narrative again revolves around Kattia and her blond friend Estelle (Richard), who go on a journey from Quebec to the deep south, as they trace Estelle's lineage on her mom's side back to a black slave who fled captivity.
Though she doesn't participate in as many of the dramatic interludes, Bonifassi still sings around half the songs, including Black Betty, early on. The lyrics, about a black woman who has a baby with blue eyes, acquire another layer of meaning when sung by a white woman named Betty in a show about black slavery; but it's unclear how much of the irony is intended.
A rejigged SLAV was performed at Université de Sherbrooke's Centre Culturel, with a more conscientious distribution of actors along racial lines.
And that's where SLAV still falters. It is telling that one of the evening's more powerful moments comes in a scene in which Kattia ends up in jail, performing the work song I Don't Do Nobody, behind bars with James and Marcelin.
There is visual and musical poignancy to these three black women, singing how they "don't do nobody nothin', Jesus, but they hates me just the same."
That poignancy simply isn't there when Bonifassi sings these songs. Hint: it has nothing to do with her voice.
All of which leads one to wonder what a full black cast and black writer/director could do with this material.
As is, SLAV is not the offensive, shambolic mess it was last summer; but it is far from the profound piece of musical theatre it aspires to be.
It's neither here nor there.
In SLAV, two women trace Estelle's lineage on her mom's side back to a black slave who fled captivity.
AT A GLANCE:
Other SLAV dates include Jan. 23 in Saint-Jérôme, Jan. 29 in Drummondville and Feb. 15 in Saguenay. For more information, visit lacaserne.net( http://lacaserne.net/index2.php/tour/ )
tdunlevy@postmedia.com( mailto:tdunlevy@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/TChaDunlevy( https://twitter.com/tchadunlevy )
Related
Robert Lepage admits to clumsiness ahead of SLAV relaunch( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepage-admits-to-clumsiness-ahead-of-slav-relaunch )
Dunlevy: SLAV misses the mark, and a precious opportunity( https://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/music/jazz-fest-review-slav-misses-the-mark-and-precious-opportunity )
Dunlevy: SLAV, the heat wave, and other standout moments at the jazz fest( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/dunlevy-hot-spots-and-highlights-of-montreals-39th-jazz-fest )
Robert Lepage's controversial musical theatre production SLAV is beginning a mini-tour of Quebec towns.

