Is the thrill gone for good between Montrealers and Mayor Valérie Plante?
Just like every other aspect of the pre-COVID-19 world, the hopes the energetic mayor once embodied seem long forgotten in this, the autumn of our discontent.
Instead, Plante's leadership evokes boarded-up storefronts, bitter battles over bike paths and forlorn-looking pedestrian corridors in a deserted downtown
Depicted as Wonder Woman by Montreal Gazette editorial cartoonist Aislin when she defeated incumbent mayor Denis Coderre three years ago on Nov. 5, 2017, Plante has taken a beating from the media in recent months.
She also faces dissent within her own ranks, according to a recent report that accuses Projet Montréal of muzzling party members.
And a recent poll indicates six out of 10 Montrealers say they will not vote for her in the next municipal election in November 2021. Nearly half of the 51 per cent of voters who supported her in 2017 would not do so again, the poll by Ad Hoc Research for Radio-Canada suggests.
Meanwhile, the city faces formidable challenges as the pandemic continues to devastate the economy. Two weeks ago, the Quebec government threw a $263-million lifeline to Montreal, which had projected a $129-million deficit this year.
Plante's pledge to get traffic flowing smoothly again by deploying a "mobility squad" on city streets and co-ordinating construction projects has failed to eliminate bottlenecks. She recently put one-third of the city's infrastructure projects on hold, saying "Montrealers need a break."
The signature promise of her 2017 election campaign - a Pink métro line crossing Montreal diagonally from Lachine to Montreal North - has not begun to materialize. Instead, Plante has suggested that an eventual east-west tramway from Lachine to downtown proposed by the Quebec government would be a partial replacement, even though critics note that unlike the Pink Line, its proposed route along Notre-Dame St. does not cross underserved areas of Montreal West and Notre-Dame-de-Grâce.
Related
Allison Hanes: With her mayoralty disrupted, Plante has been in the eye of city's COVID storm
Montreal mayor says getting death threats is not 'part of the job'
On the third anniversary of her election, Plante spoke by videoconference with the Montreal Gazette about the challenges ahead and the path to a second term. The interview has been edited for clarity and length.
Q: A poll last week said six out of 10 Montrealers say they're unlikely to vote for you in the next election. Why has your popularity plummeted when some other politicians appear to be holding their own during the COVID pandemic?
A: The municipal level is the grassroots level. Whatever is being done or not done, often people will blame it on the municipal government. It could be somebody's not happy because their garbage didn't get picked up or because of decisions that affect their day-to-day life.
To me, I feel like there was being the mayor before COVID and being the mayor since COVID. I find it quite remarkable how people's mood changes so fast. For example, during the first wave, when I decided to move forward with the homeless situation, and make masks mandatory, I felt like people were definitely behind me. But then there were one or two decisions I think were very polarizing.
Ever since I became mayor, my vision has always been the same. I'm not doing things that I've never talked about before. I've always talked about the same things: ecological transition, housing, transport and economic development.
Q: In the spring, you said that creating cycling and walking corridors on commercial streets would help downtown businesses through the COVID-19 pandemic. But many Montrealers say these measures only made things worse. A recent survey by the Downtown Business Development Corporation showed that car drivers spent twice as much as shoppers who used other means of transportation. It also showed two out of three downtown shoppers this summer came by car. On Notre-Dame St., restaurateurs forced the city to back down on traffic measures. How do you evaluate your measures now in the light of these negative reactions?
A: I don't know what people are talking about when they say, 'We come shopping with our cars, we don't come shopping with our bikes.' I understand that. I agree with what they're saying. But there's no new bike path downtown, so I don't understand where this is coming from.
What about her campaign promise of free transit for children and seniors, and fare reductions for people on low incomes? "The mandate is not over," Mayor Valérie Plante points out.
Q: You've faced a storm of negative media coverage in recent months. Commentator Richard Martineau said you should be kicked out, while La Presse accused you of living in a bubble. Guy A. Lepage said the St-Denis St. express bike lane was the worst idea of the year. Why do you think the media is piling on?
A: I think you should ask them. I'm not a different person than before. I am exactly the same mayor, although I've had to deal with COVID and that's pretty much where I'm putting all my time. It seems like all the frustration gets directed at me. I'm responsible for everything.
What I find disturbing is that a lot of people forget that I'm not doing (the bike path on St-Denis) because I hate cars. I don't wake up in the morning saying, 'I don't like cars.' I do it because of safety. Since 2014, 300 pedestrians or cyclists were hit and injured on St-Denis. There were nine people who died, including Mathilde Blais. It could have been me. I'm someone who takes my bike to work. It could have been me rolling under the wheels of a big truck. Every time somebody gets hit, I always get these messages, 'We gotta do something.' That's what we're doing. So I do not understand.
Q: There was a study by the Urban Development Institute that said downtown Montreal is in the intensive care ward. Three out of four people in Greater Montreal don't go downtown anymore. Ninety-two per cent of downtown workers want to keep working from home. The hotels are empty. A lot of people say it will never go back to what it was. What is your vision for the downtown of the future? What actions are you going to take to make sure that we somehow have a thriving downtown?
A: I think it's a bit early to know how downtown, not only in Montreal but also in other big cities, will change. Of course downtown cores will change. But I'm not ready to say that they will be completely different. Because, when I talk to big companies, like the Banque Nationale or the Caisse populaire, what they hear is that people are looking forward to coming back. Will it be 100 per cent? Maybe not. But people are not willing to stay like this for the rest of their lives.
We have an economic recovery plan that is ready. We wanted to present it earlier this month, but we're still in crisis mode. It's about having big investments, creating jobs, really working with all the actors to give some energy and financial support to the economy of Montreal.
Q: In the last election you promised that construction of the Pink Line would start by the end of your mandate. You also promised to accelerate the Blue Line extension. But it seems work will not start on the Pink Line by the next election. You also promised free transit for children under 12 and seniors, and fare reductions for people on low incomes. What will you do to fulfill these promises by next November?
A: I still have a year to go.???? For the Pink Line, the part which is from downtown to Lachine, is now in the PQI (Plan québécois des infrastructures) of the government of Quebec. It's not like it took 20 years, like the Blue Line. It took two years and a half. Now we have to do the second half. So I will continue and I'm very proud that the first part is there.
As far as the Blue Line goes, I feel like we're moving very well. I've offered my help to the government of Quebec to support better the work with the STM with the different promoters.
And for the fares, the mandate is not over.
Q: Another election promise was 12,000 new social and affordable housing units. You said that you've achieved three-quarters of that goal. But Montreal's auditor general, Michèle Galipeau, said that in fact, no units have been delivered yet under the Accès logis Montréal program. Could you explain where are these new housing units and are people actually going to be living in these 12,000 units by the next election??
A: Absolutely. We need to keep a few things in mind. The first point is that housing is quite complex. When we made the objective, we decided to base it on the average number of Accès logis units over 10 years. The thing we did not suspect is that in the last two years, the government of Quebec did not continue with that strategy. So we didn't get new money for Accès logis. So it's something we've been talking to them about and insisting that the needs are huge. So right now what I can say is that we have reached 76 per cent of our goals. Some of them are built, some of them are under construction, some of them have received their plans and specifications, and some of them are also in the waiting line. But overall we are in a good position.
Q: You're going to be tabling your budget in two weeks. The Quebec government has refused your request to allow the city to run a deficit. How are you going to balance the budget? while freezing taxes and helping businesses that are struggling to survive?
A: It was a big decision to freeze taxes, knowing that 70 per cent of our revenues come from property taxes, but we thought it was the right thing. We have made some cuts. We had a little bit of surplus that we are using. The government of Quebec gave us $263 million, which will help us to balance the budget. Finally, we cannot have a deficit but we can take out loans, so that is something we are exploring as well.
mscott@postmedia.com

