As Environment Canada on Friday morning extended its freezing rain warnings across eastern Quebec, at least 17 Montreal and Laval residents found themselves seeking help from first responders after slipping on icy sidewalks and secondary streets.
"Since early this morning we've seen an increase in the number of calls for people who took a fall because of the freezing rain," said Urgences Santé spokesperson Stéphane Smith. "We've also seen an increase in the number of calls for people involved in minor automobile accidents( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang ) linked to the weather."
As of 10:30 a.m. a total of 17 calls for falls on ice-covered sidewalks and thoroughfares had been received by Urgences Santé in its patrol territory. "When you consider it's a Friday and a lot of people have the day off, that's more than usual( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/slip-sliding-away-and-breaking-bones-on-montreals-icy-sidewalks )," said Smith. "If you can avoid going out today, that would be a good idea."
Montreal police spokesperson Jean-Pierre Brabant said that as of Friday morning his department had received just one call concerning an accident involving no injuries but demonstrably caused by the weather: a car in Dollard-des-Ormeaux slid into a low wall.
A visually impaired elderly man uses his white cane to follow the tire path on 5th Ave. in Verdun. The sidewalks were covered in ice Dec. 27, 2019.
"The sidewalks are the worst part of it," said Brabant. "The primary roads and highways are in pretty good shape. But the side streets and sidewalks are really slippery and you have to be cautious out there."
The Sûreté du Québec was reporting no major accidents on the highways in regions affected by the freezing rain alerts.
In Abitibi-Témiscamingue the freezing rain had turned into rain by Friday morning but road conditions on Highways 117 and 111 remained treacherous.
In the area surrounding Montreal Island, road conditions have improved since Thursday night and while roads were wet, visibility was good.
However, Highway 30 remained icy in the region of Sorel-Tracy, Transport Quebec reported.
Further east along the St. Lawrence Valley, freezing rain is expected to continue over the course of the day and Environment Canada maintained or extended its warning for Saint-Jérôme, Sainte-Agathe-des-Monts, Mont-Tremblant, Maniwaki, Mont-Laurier, Joliette, Trois-Rivières, La Tuque, Saguenay, Québec, Victoriaville, Thetford Mines, Saint-Georges, Montmagny, Rivière-du-Loup, Trois-Pistoles, La Malbaie and Tadoussac.
Francois, a city of Montreal employee, salts the pedestrian crosswalk on Wellington St. in Verdun during a day of freezing rain in Montreal Dec. 27, 2019.

