Sombre start to this Saturday, with news of a fatal fire in Lachine.
Arson investigation after apartment fire in Lachine claims 2 lives:( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/lachine-fire-that-claimed-life-of-woman-child-being-investigated-as-arson )A fire in an apartment building in the Lachine borough in Montreal on Friday night cost the lives of an 8-year-old girl and a 40-year-old woman. Despite their resuscitation efforts, the two were declared dead on the scene by firefighters and paramedics, according to Matthew Griffith, head of the prevention section at the Service de sécurité incendie de Montréal (SIM). The flames broke out around 11 p.m. Friday in the 51-unit building located on Duff Court St., near the corner of Esther-Blondin St. Three others in the same unit were taken to the hospital, including a five-year-old girl who was still in critical condition on Saturday morning. Two boys, aged 13, also suffered injuries, but their lives are not in danger. Seventy firefighters were called to the scene. Because of the two fatalities, the investigation has been turned over to the arson unit of the Service de police de la Ville de Montréal (SPVM).
West-coast heatwave abates: Yes, while we are pulling on boots and frantically trying to get the winter tires put on, the west coast has a different problem. Scientists say a marine heat wave that blanketed a large area of the west coast has weakened, but the potential disruption to ocean life isn't over yet. Nate Mantua of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said the "good news" is that the area of exceptionally warm water is substantially smaller now than it was earlier this year. And while the area about 1,500 kilometres offshore between Hawaii and Alaska is still seeing high temperatures by historical standards, it is "simply not nearly as large as it was and it is no longer strong in areas near the west coast," he said. Scientists have been watching a marine heat wave that developed around June this year and resembled a phenomenon that was nicknamed 'The Blob,' which disrupted ocean life between 2014 and 2016. The heat wave, which resembles a wedge this time, stretched from south of Vancouver Island to Baja, Calif., and offshore towards Hawaii. It raised temperatures by up to 4 C.
Georgian police arrest more than 25 in clashes at gay movie premiere: Police in Tbilisi, Georgia said on Saturday they had arrested more than 25 people after ultra-nationalist protesters attempting to derail the premiere of an award-winning movie about gay love clashed with security forces. A few hundred demonstrators blocked the road outside a cinema in the capital's city centre on Friday ahead of the first screening of And Then We Danced, which tells the story of two young male Georgian ballet dancers falling in love. Chanting "Long live Georgia" and "Shame," the protesters - some holding crosses and religious icons - tried to force their way inside the cinema but were held back by riot police. "This is not just a movie. This is an insult to our faith, our traditions and all that is holy for us," said Guram Damenia, who came dressed in a traditional Georgian costume. Two police officers and a young woman, who was trying to go watch the film, were injured, police said. The movie premiered at the Cannes film festival in May and has won awards at festivals around the world.
Sources: Canadian Press, Reuters, Montreal Gazette

