Expect a wild weather ride over the next 24 hours.
According to an Environment Canada weather alert( https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/report_e.html?qc67 ), snow will turn to freezing rain and then to plain rain, as the temperature rises to an unseasonably warm 3 Celsius. Then the snow will start again.
As of 5 p.m., with the temperature hovering around -7 C, snow was falling in Montreal.
But Environment Canada said it was expected to turn to freezing rain within a few hours.
Then, around midnight, with the temperature above freezing, rain was expected to start.
That rain is to continue for much of Thursday when the high is forecast to reach 3 C.
Late Thursday afternoon, the rain should turn to snow as the temperature starts falling, Environment Canada said. The low for Thursday night is expected to be about -11 C.
The weather could wreak havoc with the city of Montreal's snow-clearing operation.
As of 4 p.m. Wednesday, the city said just under half of 23 centimetres of snow that fell on Sunday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-hits-the-ground-plowing-as-montreal-faces-a-week-of-wild-weather ) had been hauled away.
The freezing rain could force the city of Montreal to slow or suspend snow-removal if streets and sidewalks are covered by a sheet of ice, Mayor Valérie Plante said Wednesday.
"We wish this weren't coming because we are still carrying out snow removal, she told journalists after giving a speech to entrepreneurs at Place Bonaventure.
"But that's life and we have to deal with it," Plante said.
She said "the city has to decide where to put the priority, and obviously if there is freezing rain, that means spreading salt and abrasives.
"So I can't tell you exactly what will happen. It's not a precise science. Snow removal and de-icing really depend on the weather and the ability of crews to act rapidly."
Related
Unusually cold snowstorm hits Montreal region( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-is-being-clobbered-by-an-unusual-uncomfortable-blizzard )
Montreal hits the ground plowing in wake of record-breakingly cold snowstorm( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-hits-the-ground-plowing-as-montreal-faces-a-week-of-wild-weather )

