Montreal company awaits approval of device that disinfects masks
A device that disinfects medical masks can't be sold in Canada because its approval is mired in red tape, according to its makers.
At least four water-related deaths in Quebec on Saturday
With the arrival of summer, the death toll on lakes and rivers is rising, with at least four deaths in Quebec on Saturday.
Allison Hanes: No more pencils, no more books - no plans to speak of
The end of the school year is usually a time of celebration, appreciation and anticipation. It's a moment for students to pat themselves on the back for a job well done, thank their teachers and look ahead to summer fun. But this year, as we know, is different. A lot different.
Fitness: Taking group exercise outside
Timing is everything. Just ask Sean Coulton, who opened up his 1,400-square-foot Pointe-Claire fitness studio Uniti Fitness on Jan. 6. Ten weeks later, the doors were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Like thousands of other gym owners, he was forced to pivot quickly, moving classes online in order to keep members engaged, active and paying membership dues. It wasn't an easy transition.
Man dies after Montreal police pepper-spray him
Quebec's police watchdog is investigating after a 51-year-old man died during a police intervention in downtown Montreal late Saturday.
Quebec reports 92 new COVID-19 cases, nine more deaths
Quebec has recorded 92 new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to 54,766, the provincial government said Sunday.
Forest fire in Lac-St-Jean remains near Hydro-Québec plant
The number of forest fires in Quebec is on the rise, including one in the Lac-Saint-Jean region that has already ravaged more than 62,000 hectares since last Tuesday.
Ducakis François, Willy St. Jean guilty of manslaughter in fatal Montreal North shooting
A jury in its third day of deliberation at the Gouin courthouse has found two men guilty of manslaughter in the death of a Montreal North resident who was shot inside his apartment building nearly three years ago.
Quebec-Labrador First Nations chief skeptical of Legault's racism committee
National Indigenous Peoples Day takes on special significance this year, amid reports of systemic racism following a litany of disturbing actions by police. The Assembly of Quebec-Labrador First Nations is launching a new campaign to demand justice.

