Updated throughout the day on Friday, Nov. 20. Questions/comments: ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Quebec reports 1,259 new cases, 32 deaths as hospitalizations drop
Hospital capacity could be surpassed outside Montreal
Canada could see 60,000 daily cases by year-end, projections show
Quebec allows Christmas parties over four days, adjusts holiday breaks for students
Province will not allow Hanukkah or New Year's Eve parties, Legault says
Sign up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter
12:15 p.m. 'A normal Christmas is right out of the question' - Trudeau
Speaking from outside his home in Ottawa, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau addressed Canadians this afternoon.
"We have a long winter ahead," he said. "As the weather drives us indoors, we are really in danger of seeing more transmission and far too many more deaths. It will be tough, but we know what we have to do."
He added: "A normal Christmas, quite frankly, is right out of the question."
A journalist asked about reports that some Liberal MPs are not happy that Quebec will allow holiday get-togethers of up to 10 people.
In response, Trudeau said he understands why Premier François Legault is allowing gatherings over a four-day period around Christmas.
"I think Premier Legault is doing all he can to recognize the reality in which people live," Trudeau said.
Is it wise to allow people to get together amid the pandemic?
Christmas is still a way off and much can change in the meantime, Trudeau responded.
"What kinds of limits we have in place (at Christmas) will depend a lot on what we do right now, so over the coming weeks let's tighten up, let's be careful. We've done this before, we can do it again."
British Columbia has urged Trudeau to ask Canadians not to travel between provinces.
Asked if he will restrict interprovincial travel, the prime minister said he is telling people not to travel if they don't have to.
11:55 a.m. Immigration system slowed sharply during pandemic's first months
New data is painting a stark picture of how the shutdown of the immigration system due to the COVID-19 pandemic has affected thousands of lives, The Canadian Press is reporting.
The figures show approvals for immigration applications fell by more than half in the months between March and August when compared to the first two months of 2020.
At the same time, the number of extensions given to people with existing permits skyrocketed. The data was tabled in the House of Commons in response to a question from NDP immigration critic Jenny Kwan.
She says extensions need to be made automatic so Immigration Department staff can focus on new files and avoid the risk of a backlog that could take years to clear.
The information obtained by the NDP shows that at the end of March, the department was operating at 38-per-cent capacity but is now nearing 90 per cent.
11:30 a.m. Quebec's decision to allow Christmas gatherings questioned
The decision to allow get-togethers over Christmas is a reminder that minority religions are not taken as seriously as the majority, said Rabbi Lisa Grushcow of Temple Emanu-El-Beth Sholom in Westmount.
"There's this constant push and pull of Quebec calling itself a secular society, but the four days they chose are the days people are celebrating Christmas," Grushcow noted.
"We are shifting the school schedule, but God forbid there would be a teacher with a hijab in the classroom."
Read our full story, by Katherine Wilton.
11:05 a.m. Quebec reports 1,259 new cases, 32 deaths as hospitalizations drop
Quebec's caseload increased by more than 1,200 again on Friday, with 32 additional deaths reported - but hospitalizations fell.
The province recorded 1,259 new cases of COVID-19, according to the latest government update.
That's 52 more than Thursday.
Montreal added the most new infections of any region - 294, followed by Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean (213) and Montérégie (159).
Of the 32 deaths, nine occurred over the past 24 hours. Twenty-two others occurred between Nov. 13 and 18, and one on an unknown day.
Two deaths previously attributed to COVID-19 have been removed from the death toll.
The number of people in the hospital with COVID-19 dropped by 27. The new total: 624.
Among those hospitalized, 96 are in intensive care - five fewer than the previous day.
On Wednesday, Quebec conducted 34,703 tests. That's the last day for which screening data is available.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, Quebec has reported 129,699 cases and 6,774 deaths linked to COVID-19.
10:45 a.m. Resto resilience: How chefs are combatting the second wave
With lowered revenue, ongoing expenses and government subsidies dwindling, you won't hear a lot of restaurants say they're doing wonderfully these days.
And yet, plenty of places are innovating, offering everything from heat-and-serve tasting menus to comfort food classics for takeout and delivery.
Read our full story, by Amie Watson.
Chef-owner Aaron Langille makes a duck breast ham with fermented cabbage and homemade ketchup on hotteok-inspired bread sandwich at his Le Diplomate restaurant in Mile Ex.
10:15 a.m. Hospital capacity could be surpassed outside Montreal by mid-December
With cases on the rise, there is a risk that hospitalizations outside Greater Montreal could exceed hospital capacities over the next month.
That's one of the conclusions of the latest weekly projection by public health researchers at the Institut national d'excellence en santé et en services sociaux.
"The data suggest a less marked increase in hospitalizations than expected in Montreal and adjacent regions, so hospital capacity overruns are not expected in these regions for the next four weeks," the institute said this morning.
"However, in other regions of Quebec the increase in projected hospitalizations is higher. Thus, a risk of exceeding capacities cannot be excluded, in particular because of outbreaks observed" in seniors' residences.
"Although the situation has been fairly stable over the past few weeks, increasingly high risks of hospital capacity overruns are starting to emerge, especially in certain regions outside of Montreal," Health Minister Christian Dubé said.
"With the holidays ahead, it remains crucial to be even more disciplined and to do everything to further protect the most vulnerable.
"The situation remains under control, but our room for manoeuvre is thinning, and that is why I invite the entire population to redouble their efforts for the coming weeks."
#COVID19 Données au 17 nov : @INESSS_Qc montre une ?? de 27% du risque des hospit. On prévoit ainsi que les capacités hospit. pourraient être dépassées à la mi-déc. hors du Grand MTL. On doit continuer nos efforts pour éviter d'atteindre cette capacité.
- Christian Dubé (@cdube_sante) November 20, 2020
9:50 a.m. Cases are soaring in Canada
These charts are from a document the Public Health Agency of Canada published this morning.
They show the current situation in Canada, longer-range forecasts and a comparison with other countries.
9:40 a.m. Canada could see 60,000 daily cases by year-end, projections show
From The Canadian Press:
Canada's chief public health officer says there's "urgency" to bringing infections down as officials released dire new forecasts indicating that COVID-19 case counts have far surpassed levels seen during the first wave.
Dr. Theresa Tam says COVID-19 cases could skyrocket to 60,000 per day by the end of the year if Canadians increase their contact rates.
The modelling predicts that at current rates of contact, Canada is careening towards a surge of more than 20,000 cases per day by the end of December.
But if socialization increases, the projections indicate that as 2020 draws to a close, Canada could see twelvefold increase from the current level of around 5,000 cases per day, which is already straining the health-care system in some regions.
The forecasts predict that at current rates Canada's case total could land between 366,500 and 378,600 and the death toll could fall between 11,870 and 12,120 by the end of the month.
Currently, Tam says an average of 4,800 cases are being reported daily - about a 15 per cent increase compared to last week.
The data says the percentage of people testing positive has increased to about 6.5 per cent, above the World Health Organization's benchmark of five per cent.
Tam says this could indicate that Canada is not testing enough, and is a clear sign that the spread of the virus is accelerating.
Tam says there are about 52,000 active cases in Canada to date, with a cumulative tally of more 315,000 cases.
Still, Tam says that amounts to less than one per cent of the population that has tested positive, meaning the vast majority of Canadians are still susceptible to infection.
9:30 a.m. Quebec allows Christmas parties over four days, adjusts holiday breaks for students
Late yesterday afternoon, Premier François Legault announced Quebec's pandemic Christmas plan
People will be allowed to congregate in groups of 10, be they family members or friends, from Dec. 24 to 27.
And there will be some remote learning for students before they go on their Christmas break, and high school students will get an extra week off in January.
Reporter René Bruemmer has the details in our full story
Columnist Allison Hanes, for her part, writes that in attempting to accommodate every family scenario, "there is a risk of encouraging overindulgence we will all pay for in the new year."
9:25 a.m. Quebec will not allow Hanukkah or New Year's Eve gatherings, Legault says 9:20 a.m. Trudeau will conduct briefings back at his home as cases surge
To underscore the importance of minimizing contacts, today Prime Minister Justin Trudeau will conduct a news conference outside his home, Rideau Cottage - the site of his daily briefings during the first wave of the deadly pandemic last spring.
Read our full story.
9:15 a.m. Here's where Montrealers can get tested today
Montrealers can be screened at test centres across the island.
You can check screening clinic wait times here
8:45 a.m. Canada saw 4,600 new cases, 79 deaths yesterday
This was the situation across Canada as of last night, according to the Canada COVID-19 Situational Awareness Dashboard.
8:30 a.m. Sign up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter
Stay informed with our daily email newsletter focused on local coronavirus coverage and other essential news, delivered directly to your email inbox by 7 p.m. on weekdays.
You can sign up here
ariga@postmedia.com
Read my previous live blogs here
Related
Coronavirus updates, Nov. 19: Quebec allows 10-person Christmas gatherings, extends high school break by one week
Coronavirus updates, Nov. 18: Quebec considers extending school break as Ontario scraps idea

