Montrealers who are already sweltering through the second day of high temperatures( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-heat-wave-continues-with-chance-of-thunderstorms ) on Tuesday now have to deal with the possibility of severe thunderstorms breaking out over the course of the day.
Environment Canada, who issued a severe thunderstorm watch at 4:44 a.m., raised the alert to the level of a warning at 1:51 p.m., saying their "meteorologists are tracking a severe thunderstorm capable of producing very strong wind gusts, up to nickel size hail and heavy rain."
The urban areas covered by the storm watch are Montréal, Joliette, Saint-Jérôme, Trois-Rivières, Shawinigan, Sorel-Tracy, Granby, Sherbrooke, Saint-Hyacinthe, Drummondville, Victoriaville, Thetford Mines, Lac-Mégantic, Saint-Georges and Quebec City.
As of 3:30 p.m., Hydro Quebec reported roughly 80 service interruptions in the Montreal and Laval areas, affecting thousands of customers.
High winds are pushing branches into contact with power lines, resulting in them being turned off automatically, said Hydro Quebec spokesperson Gary Sutherland.
Residents in Laval said trees have fallen onto houses during the storm.
"When there's no damage, it's really just a question of putting the breaker back on," Sutherland said. "We're seeing a lot of fluctuations."
Sutherland expects the fluctuations to continue throughout the afternoon as the weather shifts.
Meanwhile, the heat warning issued on Monday morning remains in effect for Montreal on Tuesday.
Cooler temperatures and drier air are expected Wednesday.
The forecast for Montreal on Tuesday calls for a few showers or thunderstorms beginning early this afternoon along with the risk of a severe thunderstorm this afternoon and a forecast high of 30 C with a humidex of 38 C( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/the-humidex-canadians-didnt-invent-humidity-but-we-labeled-it ). The risk of a severe thunderstorm will continue into the evening with a forecast low for tonight of 21 C.
Related
Fitness: Here's what happens when you exercise during a heat wave( https://montrealgazette.com/health/diet-fitness/heres-what-happens-when-you-exercise-during-a-heat-wave )
The great AC debate: When some like it hot, but others not so much( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/the-great-ac-debate-when-some-like-it-hot-but-others-not-so-much )

