Mayor Valérie Plante is telling the city's 19 boroughs to make safe streets and sidewalks their top priority as snow removal operations resume( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/next-snow-removal-will-start-as-soon-as-this-one-ends-plante ).
In a letter sent Tuesday afternoon, Plante cracks the whip on mayors by telling them to improve the efficiency of snow removal operations by keeping a close eye on them and reporting any problems like equipment breakdowns to the central city immediately.
In particular, Plante emphasized the need to spread abrasives on icy sidewalks, streets and bike paths.
"I'm counting on you to pay particular attention to operations in your respective boroughs. Over the next few days, I want every one of you to be able to show your satisfaction in the work done," she writes.
"My expectations are very high and I will not accept, under any pretext, inadequate execution, because the population of Montreal expects, and has a right to expect, high quality services without fail on the entire territory," she writes.
The next five days( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-breezy-with-a-chance-of-flurries ) are a window of opportunity to improve the situation created by last week's weather cocktail( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/weather-nightmare-continues-schools-closed-treacherous-roads-amid-downpour ), which included everything from extreme cold to blowing snow and freezing rain, she says.
Opposition leader Lionel Perez said the letter shows the mayor is finally responding to criticisms he raised about treacherous conditions on city streets( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/snow-removal ).
Perez tweeted Tuesday night that the letter is "a public relations exercise = panic" and that Plante sent it to the media at the same time as the mayors received it.
He noted that Plante reassured Montrealers that all was being done to make streets safe, but by Tuesday was acknowledging the need for improvement.
"Citizens are not fooled," he tweeted.
Plante said Monday that the rain and freezing conditions that followed the snowstorm on Jan. 19-20, forcing city crews to switch from removing snow to spreading abrasives, was not just an excuse, but "a reality."

