If my kids come down with a cold in the coming days, I'm blaming Mother Nature.
After enjoying Sunday's welcome sun (and getting my first slight burn), I dared to believe we'd finally turned a corner weather-wise and that warm temperatures were here to stay.
But when I stepped out of the house Monday morning, after shipping my eldest off to school in little more than a long-sleeve shirt, my bare legs were quickly covered with goosebumps and my youngest asked to be wrapped in her freshly laundered naptime blankie. Once again, I'd been overly optimistic about the temperature.
Sunday's summery-ness was little more than a tease, it turns out. As if reading my mind, Méteo Média on Monday released a long-range forecast( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sorry-quebec-looks-like-april-showers-will-hang-around-till-july ) that puts a damper on hopes for imminent heat. June is going to be chilly, it predicts, and the hot weather is not expected until late July or early August. Maybe. If we're lucky.
On the bright side, we've been told we'll likely be spared the kind of oppressive heat wave that contributed to the deaths of 66 people in Montreal last summer. So that's positive.
But adding insult to injury, September, when the kids are back in school without air conditioning or proper ventilation, is expected to be hot again. Since my daughter experienced a suspected case of heat stroke on the second day of class last fall, that doesn't bode well.
If we're grumbling now, summer's late onset is going to make for some very unhappy campers in Montreal (both literally and figuratively speaking).
The one thing that makes winter bearable in this city - especially the long, frigid, brutal, icy one we all just lived through - is the prospect of those few months of summer warmth. When we're tip-toeing like penguins through the slippery trenches that pass for sidewalks in January and February, our resolve is derived from those distant recollections of ambling down wide boulevards lined with blooming flowers.
We don't even really have spring in this city. Typically we have the end of winter and then summer is suddenly upon us, as if the weather gods flipped a switch. And when the lights go on, Montreal comes alive. The greyness dissipates and the city is bathed in colour.
We overrun the parks or install ourselves on a terrasse. We have back-to-back festivals, from Jazz to Just For Laughs. We have street fairs on Mont-Royal Ave., St-Laurent Blvd., and Ste-Catherine St. We have the F1 and the Tour de l'île. We do everything we can to make the most of it, until the leaves turn and fall, and the first flakes tumble from the leaden clouds. But all of this is way more fun under blue skies.
Whether you revel in barbecue season, gardening season, backyard pool season, chalet season, camping season - all of these pastimes have been delayed as we wait for that switch to be definitely flipped. In the meantime, it's a rollercoaster of cool temperatures and abundant precipitation.
It seems unfair that both our summer long weekends are set to fall during this tepid period before the good weather is projected to descend. By Labour Day, most Montrealers are no longer in holiday mode. So we can only hope our overall prospects are brightened by a smattering of hot days falling fortuitously.
Those who have planned to take their vacation in early July might be regretting their decision to get summer off on the right foot, unless they're headed to distant destinations with better forecasts. And Montrealers who partake of the construction holiday at the end of July are surely crossing their fingers that the summer temperatures we're craving come sooner rather than later.
But to keep from wallowing too deeply in our own meteorological woes for the moment, some perspective is required.
The spring melt and heavy rains have left a mess to clean up from Pierrefonds to Rigaud to Ste-Marthe-sur-le-lac( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/flood ). Summer's going to be more than just a downer for those cleaning up from the devastation.
And while Montreal's weather has been crummy, it hasn't beenas wild as elsewhere on the continent( https://globalnews.ca/news/5320770/tornado-flooding-heat-u-s-weather/?utm_medium=Facebook&utm_source=GlobalToronto&fbclid=IwAR2oICSn3qUso3t5xjNJZgtUbcxuEfr3vk29gXk0dJII_YjptViobet3hms ). Tornadoes have torn through Oklahoma and deadly heatwaves have descended on the American South. Wildfires are also burning in Alberta, alarmingly early given the blazes that blackened swaths of British Columbia during last year's scorching season.
Whether we chalk it up to climate change or nature's fury, shifting patterns and extreme events have become a fact of life.
For this summer, all we can hope is that the grim forecast is wrong.
ahanes@postmedia.com( mailto:ahanes@postmedia.com )
Related
Allison Hanes: Montreal needs some sprucing up( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-montreal-needs-some-sprucing-up )
Allison Hanes: Good riddance to a soul-destroying January!( https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/allison-hanes-good-riddance-to-a-soul-destroying-january )

