? First-ballot voting at the Liberal leadership convention was delayed for more than hour Friday because of technical problems accrediting alternates for voting delegates, some of whom were battling freezing rain and sleet to get to Montreal.
The vote was to begin at 3 p.m. local time in what is considered one of the most wide-open Liberal conventions in a generation.
But the processing of "bumping up" alternates to fill vacancies of elected delegates who did not make it here did not go as smoothly as party officials had hoped.
Officials expected that the delay would not be too long, but hundreds of delegates waited outside the doors to the polling stations Friday afternoon to be among the first to vote.
First-ballot voting was to continue until about 10 p.m., an hour after the last candidate's speech. Second and subsequent ballots are to be held.
The problems started in the morning when delegates rushed to register at the convention before the 9 a.m. deadline. Anyone who is not registered could not vote in the afternoon.
Adriana Galloro, a supporter of Stéphane Dion, was the last delegate to squeeze through the doors of the registration room before the doors were shut in the morning.
John Lyras, a Gerard Kennedy supporter who was on the same delayed Air Canada flight as Ms. Galloro, didn't make it. Sweating and winded, he raced up the escalator to the registration room to see the doors shut before him.
Liberal officials later relented and extended registration by a few minutes to accommodate Mr. Lyras and the handful of other late arrivals who were on the same flight from Toronto but not as fleet of foot as Ms. Galloro.
The intensity of that final foot highlights just how wide-open this convention is.
The Kennedy-Dion competition for votes is particularly intense. They are neck-neck, believed to be almost tied for third position on the first ballot later Friday. The third-place spot is generally considered an ideal slot if the two front-runners, Michael Ignatieff and Bob Rae, deadlock or stumble.
Mr. Dion bagged the support of former minister and ambassador Allan Rock.
Officials in the Dion camp said that Mr. Rock, who long harboured leadership aspirations of his own, is announcing Friday that he is supporting his former cabinet colleague.
The endorsement is expected to provide a boost to the candidacy of Mr. Dion, who has yet to convince all Liberal delegates that he has all the leadership abilities of a prime minister.
Mr. Rock is Canada's former ambassador to the United Nations, and a former minister of health and industry in the Chrétien government. He is back to his law practice.
The weather shouldn't be the deciding factor in the leadership contest, Mr. Lyras said.
Ms. Galloro, a teacher from Richmond Hill, Ont., said the dash to get here was a nightmare.
"We found out about one o'clock this morning our flight was cancelled because of the weather. We finally got going about 7 o'clock" from the Toronto airport.
Morning rush hour traffic added to the tension as her cab driver battled icy highways from the Montreal Trudeau Airport to the convention centre."
"But I made it. This is going to be an exciting weekend," she said.
But after registration she planned to check into her hotel and catch a few hours of sleep.
About 4,000 delegates are expected to attend the wide-open convention. There are eight candidates.

