Thursday, July 9, 2020: Here are some of the stories we've been following today.
Amber Alert issued for two missing children
The Sûreté du Québec has launched an Amber Alert after two girls, ages 6 and 11, went missing. They are believed to be with a 44-year-old man.
Last call for alcohol three hours earlier
Dancing is banned, and last call is three hours earlier. Quebec is imposing a midnight last call on the province's bars and a closing time of 1 a.m. in an effort to forestall a second COVID-19 wave, Health Minister Christian Dubé announced on Thursday.
Also: Coronavirus updates, July 9: Legault concerned by increase in new cases
Also: The psychology of masks: why won't Quebecers wear them
Arrest in fiery Highway 440 crash
Police have arrested Jagmeet Grewal, 54, in connection with a fiery, multi-vehicle crash that left four people dead last year, the Sûreté du Québec said Thursday. The collision occurred on Aug. 5 on Highway 440 in Laval.
Battling COVID-19 and the heat
As a cushion of hot air smothers Southern Quebec for the third time in as many months, public health officials who have already seen heat-related deaths this year worry about managing the extreme heat and coronavirus at the same time.
Quebec singer-songwriter Safia Nolin is seen in October 2018 file photo.
Singer Safia Nolin accuses actress of sexual harassment
Quebec TV star Maripier Morin is going on a professional hiatus following allegations that she sexually harassed singer Safia Nolin. On Wednesday afternoon, the Hockey Wives star released a statement saying she was taking a break to work on her mental health.
Forecast for housing starts is reduced
Residential construction sites across Quebec may be up and running again, but a key industry association is cutting its full-year forecast for housing starts due to COVID-19's lasting effects.
Plante vows to remove benches from Cabot Square
Mayor Valérie Plante has vowed to remove benches from Cabot Square that make it impossible for the homeless people to rest on them.
Promoter Camille Estephan speaks with boxer David Lemieux, left, during a news conference in Montreal on March 9, 2016.
Boxing on the ropes
Two Montreal boxing promoters have come out punching against a proposal from the Quebec government that would see the sport prohibited until a COVID-19 vaccine is discovered.
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette

