Busy day? Here's what you might have missed.
The week-long heat wave is now over, but the death toll in Quebec climbed to 54 on Friday( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-warning-storm-watch-dropped-for-montreal-area-as-heat-wave-ends ). A spokesperson for Santé Montréal confirmed that, as of Friday morning, 28 deaths in the city may have been related to the extreme heat. The majority of deaths involved someone dying of an underlying conditions, such as diabetes, within a hot environment at home, said Dr. David Kaiser, a specialist with the public health department. None of the 28 deaths occurred in hospitals or long-term care facilities, he specified. Environment Canada lifted its week-old heat warning for the Montreal area early Friday. The last time Montreal saw a seven-day heat wave with temperatures above 30 C was in 1973, according to meteorologist Alexandre Parent. He said extreme weather like this has a tendency to occur every 20 years. However, the weather station at McGill University's downtown campus has never picked up more than five consecutive days of weather over 33 C in its 147 years of operation, making this heat wave a first. The cumulative effect of the prolonged heat, during which humidex levels reached up to 40 C, may still impact residents, explained Stefan Overhoff, a spokesperson for Urgences-Santé. Throughout the last week, the number of calls to emergency services jumped by about 30 per cent, Overhoff said, from 1,000 calls a day to anywhere between 1,200 to 1,350 interventions.
Brace for a traffic nightmare centring on the Décarie Expressway in N.D.G.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/traffic-nightmares-forecast-for-decarie-expressway-in-n-d-g ) Starting Monday at 5 a.m., construction work on the Décarie Expressway and Highway 15 will force the closure of the Sherbrooke St. entrance to the Décarie Expressway northbound, and the exit leading to Sherbrooke St. off of the Décarie northbound. Drivers who usually exit there are being advised to take the Côte-St-Luc/Queen Mary exit, which is already heavily used. "This could be the worst," said Notre-Dame-de-Grâce city councillor Peter McQueen, which is saying a lot coming from a neighbourhood so negatively affected by the reconstruction of the Turcot Interchange it has spawned headlines like "Escape from N.D.G." But McQueen added a light at the end of the tunnel. The Sherbrooke St. entrance to the Décarie is expected to re-open in September. The Sherbrooke St. exit will reopen at the end of October. And the lane reductions are expected to be completed by November, said Transports Québec spokesman Martin Girard.
A map of Decarie closures provided by Transport Quebec
The Parti Québécois is backing director Robert Lepage following the cancellation of SLAV, his jazz fest show( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepage-breaks-his-silence-on-jazz-fest-decision-to-muzzle-slav ). Lepage broke his silence over a decision by the Montreal International Jazz Festival to shut down his controversial production after just three performances, saying the move was a "direct blow to artistic freedom." Hours after his statement was released, the Parti Québécois threw its support behind Lepage, with leader Jean-François Lisée likening the cancellation to censorship and MNA Maka Kotto describing it as "intellectual terrorism." PQ MNA Pascal Bérubé called on Quebec Culture Minister Marie Montpetit to take a stand, saying the shuttering of the show sets "a precedent that will leave its mark on creators and artists." Friday afternoon, Montpetit weighed in, calling on Lepage and festival officials to begin a dialogue. "Freedom of expression and creation are fundamental elements in our society and should always be protected," she tweeted. "However, we can't control or judge the way people feel." The production, which features songs composed by slave cultures including black slaves in the United States, was criticized for having a mostly white cast and a white director. Protesters accused the show of appropriation of black culture.
Construction entrepreneur Antonio Accurso has filed a request to be released from a penitentiary while he appeals his conviction for his role in Laval's municipal corruption( https://montrealgazette.com/news/accurso-asks-for-release-while-he-appeals-laval-corruption-conviction ). Accurso, 66, received a four-year prison term for taking part in the system of collusion created by former Laval mayor Gilles Vaillancourt through which contracts were awarded, between 1996 and 2010, to dozens of companies before they were put to tender. Accurso's lawyer, Marc Labelle, said he expects to be able to argue for Accurso's release before the Quebec Court of Appeal in Montreal on Tuesday. As part of his arguments in his request to be released, Accurso states he wants to be free while he deals with his other legal woes, including two impaired driving-related cases he faces at the municipal courthouse in Deux-Montagnes, the city where he resides. In one case, that dates back to 2011, he is accused of driving while impaired. The other case, filed last year, alleges Accurso refused to submit to a breathalyzer test after being pulled over just before midnight on May 15, 2017.
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette

