Here are five things you should know about the Canadiens-Stars game Tuesday at the Bell Centre (7:30 p.m., TSN2, RDS, TSN 690 Radio):
The matchup: The Canadiens are coming off an impressive 3-0 win over the Bruins Saturday night in Boston. It's still early but Montreal, with a 6-2-2 record, has been one of the major surprises in the NHL and the Canadiens have reached this point without losing back-to-back games. This is the second stop on a six-game road trip for Dallas, which has a 5-5 record after losing 4-2 in Detroit Sunday. The loss left the Stars with an 0-3 record on the road.
Domi continues to roll: Newcomer Max Domi scored his fifth goal of the season Saturday as he extended his consecutive-game points streak to six games. He has five goals and three assists in that streak and he leads the Canadiens in scoring with 11 points. Brendan Gallagher scored his team-leading sixth goal in Boston. The other Montreal goal was an empty-netter by defenceman Jordie Benn, whose first point of the season ended a 58-game goal drought.
Defence leads the way: Before the season started, there were serious concerns about the Canadiens defence with Shea Weber on the injured reserve list to start the season and goaltender Carey Price coming off the worst season of his career. Those fears appear unfounded. The Canadiens have the fifth-best goals-against average in the league (2.47) and Price's shutout against the Bruins gave Price a 4-1-2 record with a 2.13 GAA and a .922 save percentage.
Radulov likely to return: If you were hoping to boo Alex Radulov when he plays against his former team, you might be in luck. Radulov has missed the past four games with an undisclosed injury, but he skated Monday and there's a good chance he'll be back. Radulov, who spurned the Canadiens' offer two summers ago in favour of lower taxes and better football in Texas, scored four goals and added six assists in his first six games.
Coach Monty comes home: Montreal native Jim Montgomery will be behind the Dallas bench as he returns to the Bell Centre for the first time since 2002, when he played for the Stars. Montgomery's NHL career included a brief stop in Montreal in 1994 after he was traded for Guy Carbonneau. He was hired by the Stars after a successful run in the USHL and in the U.S. college ranks, where he won the 2017 NCAA title with Denver.
phickey@postmedia.com
twitter.com/zababes1
Related
Stu Cowan: Back in black - it's early, but Habs GM likes what he sees( https://wp.me/p4Uzqt-5FaN )
What the Puck: Will Habs' autumn heat wave lead to cold, dead spring?( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/hockey/nhl/montreal-canadiens/what-the-puck-will-habs-autumn-heat-wave-lead-to-cold-dead-spring )
Actor Jay Baruchel on his love for the Canadiens and hockey( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/born-into-it-tropic-thunder-actor-jay-baruchel-divulges-stories-of-lifelong-fandom-from-new-book/wcm/e0bfd3a5-3e1f-472c-8f55-678d3d77f3ea )
Jack Todd: Carey Price still has a way to go to be Habs' greatest goalie( https://montrealgazette.com/sports/jack-todd-price-still-has-a-way-to-go-to-be-habs-greatest-goalie )

