It's time to put down the coveted package of toilet paper, give the brain a break from doomsday social media posts and plunge into a new pastime. That's what mental health experts are suggesting as the Quebec-wide shutdown continues in the effort to stem the spread of COVID-19.
The phenomenon of hoarding - notably of toilet paper, hand sanitizer and food - is an obvious manifestation of an "epidemic" of stress and fear gripping the province and elsewhere, say experts who spoke with the Montreal Gazette this week.
However, they offered suggestions on how people - nascent hoarders and others - can manage the stress.
The experts' coping tools start with limiting time spent scanning social media for information on the pandemic and include practising positive and goal-oriented thinking. The experts even have suggestions on how to do the latter two.
But first, about that hoarding.
"There's a large part of what's going on that is also an epidemic of panic and anxiety about something other than the coronavirus, or about a threat that may or may not happen but has not happened yet," said Samuel Veissière, an assistant professor in the department of psychiatry at McGill University.
An evolutionary anthropologist, Veissière offered an explanation for hoarding that's rooted in the past: humans have long been obsessed with potential threats.
"We have these well-understood psychological vulnerabilities and cognitive biases for negative information," said Veissière, who is also co-director of the Culture, Mind and Brain program at McGill.
"We evolved in dangerous environments. Our minds are obsessed with anything that conveys information about potential threats. This is why the stuff that really goes viral online is always about outrage, about panic. And the 24-hour news cycle and the social media feeds don't help because people panic and they read a lot of misinformation."
Hoarding, Veissière said, stems from a need to regain a sense of control when faced with uncertainty, such as the invisible threat posed by a contagion.
"As a behavioural scientist, at first I was a little amused and now I'm more alarmed, of course," he said of news reports about store shelves being emptied of toilet paper and other goods.
"People need predictability in their lives," he added.
A shopper leaves a Montreal store with her limit of two packs of toilet paper on March 26, 2020 as stores place limits on some products because of hoarding due to the coronavirus pandemic.
"They need control. So they revert to things that they perceive to be vital to their basic survival. So food, but also face masks and toilet paper. This is almost like a magical ritual to prevent danger. People want to protect their body from infections and foreign agents. So they gravitate towards, from my perspective, really symbolic things."
The population is facing an "info-demic," Veissière said, his term for an epidemic of bad information.
People hear about an incident where a store has run out of something, so they think they also need it and start panicking, he said.
As well, a pandemic - more than a natural disaster - will tend to foster tribalism, Veissière said. Think of the stories that emerged during the 1998 ice storm about cooperation and collaboration among neighbours, and compare that to the reports of frenzied hoarding in response to COVID-19.
"A pandemic and the fear of infection from invisible agents ... recruits some dark psychological biases, the same ones that you would see with fear of witchcraft, xenophobia, fear of strangers," he said.
Robert-Paul Juster, an assistant professor in the department of psychiatry and addiction at the Université de Montréal, draws from fight-flight-freeze, the body's built-in response to threat or danger, to help explain what's happening now.
Juster, who also works with the Centre de recherche de l'Institut universitaire en santé mentale de Montréal, said the population seems to be in a "freeze" response.
"It's extremely stressful to be in a situation of restraint," he said. "That's what we're all dealing with right now as humans. We're restrained in our homes and that's increasing our stress."
Situations that are unpredictable, threaten our survival and in which we have no sense of control "are all going to make us react in a very distressed way, either with hostility, with anger (or) with protection," Juster said.
"And I think this hoarding behaviour is a real example of that. ... But the problem with that is there's an individuality element, where people are really just thinking about themselves."
In fact, Juster called the hoarding a combination of individuality and mass hysteria, the latter generated by people "constantly bombarding each other with news updates," he said. He has seen it in his own entourage.
Related
Sick with COVID-19: 'I felt like my organs were cooking from the inside( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sick-with-covid-19-i-felt-like-my-organs-were-cooking-from-the-inside/wcm/da562655-3a1f-4620-8632-978445be8b80/ )
Stay out of the city's west end, Horacio Arruda warns Montrealers( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/covid-19-legault-urges-careful-use-of-face-masks-as-quebec-cases-climb-to-1629/wcm/cc15e1e9-fe72-41c0-a506-b8c70962dc87/ )
Montreal's vaunted summer festivals in doubt( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-montreals-vaunted-summer-festivals-in-doubt/wcm/b12ccd69-384d-49f3-a49a-5b2447c83d07/ )
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus/ )
That's where coping tools come in.
Juster suggests focusing on problem-solving and setting goals.
For example, he said he decided this week to check his emails only certain times of the day and to control his use of social media. Instead, he's focusing on hobbies.
Juster said he loves chess, so he's started reading books on chess. And because he can't go to the gym, he's planning to use his home rowing machine. He recently bought a new vacuum, so he's determined to make use of it.
"We try to sublimate our anxiety and our stress towards other objectives," Juster said. "Everybody can find personalized ways of doing it."
In terms of positive thinking, Juster said he's looking forward to the lessons that will be drawn from different countries' responses to the pandemic and how that will make the health-care system more resilient in the future.
Veissière also suggested focusing on positivity.
"My belief is that most people are cooperating and collaborating," he said. "Most people are waiting in line patiently and they're buying the number of items that they're told they're allowed to buy."
The media could encourage more cooperative behaviour, Veissière added, with stories about those who are not being selfish.
Limiting the passive consumption of negative information online is important, he said, adding that it's possible to do even as people who are isolated use social media to stay connected.
Think about loved ones and friends, Veissière said, and about the quality of interactions when we meet again.
"For many people, this is finally a time to pick up that novel that they didn't finish, or start playing piano again," he said, adding that some people seem to have taken up running during the pandemic.
"Or the sun is out, we're going to be able to start gardening soon. There are just so many things that we didn't have the time to do because we're so busy working all the time."
lgyulai@postmedia.com( mailto:lgyulai@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/CityHallReport( https://twitter.com/CityHallReport )
Note to readers: We know the speed and volume of coronavirus-related news is overwhelming and a little frightening. To help with that, we will dedicate a Montreal Gazette reporter each day to devote their time to synthesizing the most important coronavirus-related news, especially as it relates to life in Montreal and Quebec. Follow their updates on March 26 right here( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/coronavirus-live-updates-quebec-with-1339-has-most-covid-19-cases-in-canada ). All our coronavirus-related news can always be found here: montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus ).
Sign up for our new email newsletter dedicated to local coronavirus coverage here: montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews( https://montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews ).

