Canadian insurers took a multimillion-dollar hit when a storm that pummelled eastern Canada from Jan. 23 to 25( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/weather-nightmare-continues-schools-closed-treacherous-roads-amid-downpour ) resulted in $39 million in claims - $26 million of which was in Quebec.
The Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) reports that the damages occurred during a combination of heavy snowfalls, freezing rain, rain and high winds that raged through Quebec and the Maritimes.
Faced with this latest round of claims due to repeated episodes of extreme weather, the IBC is asking all levels of government to plan for sturdier urban development to withstand similar events. The organization also wants new infrastructure in place to better deal with fires and flooding, as well as incentives to discourage development in zones deemed to be at risk from extreme weather.
The IBC calculates that the damages from the three days of extreme weather stood at $26 million in Quebec, $11 million in New Brunswick, $2.1 million in Nova Scotia and $270,000 in Prince Edward Island.
For example, while many roads were washed out by the storm in Quebec, cars were completely submerged in Miramichi, N.B., and in Moncton an apartment block had to be evacuated after high winds tore away part of its roof.
Heavy rain also caused flooding in southern New Brunswick, which led to further evacuations and road closures.
Power failures also caused damages, with 42,000 clients blacked out in Quebec, 12,000 in Nova Scotia and 5,300 in New Brunswick.
The IBC's call for improved infrastructure is not based exclusively on its own damage reports. The organization estimates that for every dollar it pays out in claims, governments must pay $3 to repair infrastructure damaged by extreme weather.
In a communiqué made public Tuesday, IBC spokesperson Pierre Babinsky noted that "the number of extreme weather events is continuing to grow. Canadians need to understand the physical and financial risks to which they're being exposed."
Babinsky added that "better building codes, a better understanding of the risks and improvements to infrastructure are necessary to reinforce the strength of our communities."
Related
Wacky Montreal weather creates social-media storm( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/wacky-montreal-weather-creates-social-media-storm )
Free transit after a snowstorm? We'll look into it, says city( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/free-transit-after-a-snowstorm-well-look-into-it-says-city )

