On the snow-packed sidewalk of Montclair Ave. in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, Ashley Baker stepped cautiously from driveway to front door with 8-month-old Max in a baby seat, navigating between snowbanks.
"After this past snowstorm, it's been particularly awful," she said. "They haven't even plowed the streets yet. ... There's a ridge of snow up the middle of the street, so it looks like they just let the cars plow it."
With the snow piled high on both sides of the street, her neighbour Victor Langdon wasn't able to get out of his driveway because the roadway was too narrow. Conditions have been similar for a week, he said.
"It's never perfect, but it's never like this," said Langdon, a 30-year-resident of Montclair Ave. "This is crazy that we have to wait this long."
The residents of western N.D.G. have reason to feel abandoned. Out of 19 boroughs, Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce has seen the least amount of snow removed since the snow started falling last week and continued in small increments until Tuesday, dropping a total of 27 centimetres on the city.
Only 46 per cent of the snow was removed in the borough as of Thursday before noon, according to the city's snow-clearing tracker( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement ). Meanwhile, boroughs like Anjou and Saint-Léonard have managed to take away 84 and 89 per cent of their snowfall, respectively. Others boroughs like the Sud-Ouest and Lachine have seen less than 55 per cent removed so far.
On an N.D.G. citizens' Facebook page where residents were bemoaning their narrow, slippery sidewalks, impassable for seniors and baby strollers, borough mayor Sue Montgomery apologized for the delay and asked for patience.
"I understand your frustration with the snow and I have been pushing for answers," she wrote. "What I'm told is that the equipment was set to pick up the piles of snow on Monday but then had to be dispatched to plow snow because of the snowfall that day. And I'm told it's bad everywhere in Montreal. Believe me, I'm watching and asking so we can get it right."
Montreal city spokesman Philippe Sabourin said the city was hit with an unexpected second snowfall early this week that hampered snow clearing efforts, but promised that crews were hard at work throughout the city, and that 80 per cent of the snow should be cleared by Friday, when rain is forecast( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-weather-beware-of-things-falling-from-the-sky-including-rain ), followed by freezing temperatures of minus-11 C overnight, then more snow on Saturday.
Montclair resident Baker has her doubts conditions are set to improve.
"I'm afraid its going to get really cold, and then everything is going to turn into blocks of ice. Then things are going to be incredibly bad."
rbruemmer@postmedia.com( mailto:rbruemmer@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/renebruemmer( http://twitter.com/renebruemmer )
CREDIT: René Bruemmer, Montreal Gazette

