Catch up on what stories you might have missed this week in Montreal.
There's a wild turkey roaming N.D.G., and it's all anyone can talk about( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/theres-a-wild-turkey-roaming-n-d-g-and-its-all-anyone-can-talk-about )
N.D.G.'s newest resident is ruffling feathers - and not just its own. The wild turkey, which was first spotted in the neighbourhood over the weekend, quickly became a local sensation. Members of the extremely active NDG Living group on Facebook have taken to tracking the turkey's movements. Over the weekend, it was spotted around the intersection of Cavendish and de Maisonneuve Blvds.
CAQ government to ease restrictions on cannabis use in parks( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/caq-government-poised-to-ease-restrictions-on-cannabis-use-in-parks-report )
In the interest of people who are "less wealthy and are renters," the Coalition Avenir Québec government is abandoning its hard line on marijuana smoking. Cannabis will no longer be forbidden in all public spaces, because municipalities will be able to permit it in their parks.
A cloud of smoke wafts over a crowd celebrating 4/20 at Mount Royal Park in Montreal, Wednesday, April 20, 2016.
Montreal better prepared for heat wave this year: health authorities( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/sixty-six-people-died-during-montreals-2018-heat-wave )
Montreal public health authorities say they're better prepared to handle a potentially deadly heat wave this summer than the one last year that was blamed for the deaths of 66 people, 13 more than the initial tally.( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/heat-wave-death-toll-reaches-53-in-montreal-but-could-get-higher )"I think we've improved our interventions and our capacity to work together," Dr. Mylène Drouin, director of the public health department, told a news conference Wednesday following the release of an exhaustive report on last summer's heat wave( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/at-least-15-montrealers-transported-to-hospital-for-heat-related-injuries-urgences-sante ).
Measles outbreak declared by Montreal Public Health Department( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/first-measles-outbreak-declared-by-montreal-public-health-department )
The Montreal Public Health Department has declared the city's first community measles outbreak in years after a girl contracted the highly contagious disease from a member of her family and then transmitted it to a health worker. Authorities are now trying to track down as many as 400 people who might have come into contact with the infected health worker. The caregiver had visited six locations while contagious on the West Island, St-Laurent and Town of Mount-Royal from May 11 to 14.
Montreal health authorities are taking the extraordinary step of offering free measles vaccines until June 14 to anyone who has not received the standard two doses.
A new poll shows support for Bill 21 is built on anti-Islam sentiment( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/a-new-poll-shows-support-for-bill-21-is-built-on-anti-islam-sentiment )
Anti-Muslim sentiment appears to be the main motivation for those who support a ban on religious symbols, a new poll has found. The poll of 1,212 Quebecers, conducted May 3-7, found 63 per cent of Quebecers supported a ban on religious signs for judges, police officers and prison guards, and 59 per cent were in favour of a similar ban for teachers. This was true for all age categories except for 18-24 year olds, who were against such a ban.

