If the persistent snow banks didn't make getting around hard enough, freezing rain will be added to the mix on Wednesday and Thursday.
We've gone from deep freeze, to seasonal norms, and then unseasonably warm weather.
Next up is freezing rain, rain, a snowstorm, and then back to the deep freeze.
If the winter were a children's toy, it would be a yo-yo, as Montrealers have dealt with extremes during the first three weeks of winter.
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante saluted the work of snow removal crews( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-rush-hour-slightly-less-arduous-as-snow-clearing-operations-continue ) who are carrying away the roughly 30 centimetres of snow that fell since the beginning of the year, but progress has been slower than most residents care for, as snowbanks are wreaking havoc on narrow streets, making it nearly impossible to park without having to shovel out mounds of snow.
"We're improving our services and it shows," Plante said at the webcast of the executive committee meeting Monday morning, after saying that the city received 1,600 fewer complaints than it did at this point of the season last year.
As of Wednesday morning, the city reported it had completed 39 per cent of the snow removal operation. According to the city's website( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/snowremoval/avancement ), the best borough was St-Léonard where more than half the roads had been cleared. While Lachine, Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce and Pierrefonds-Roxboro had removed less than 30 per cent of the snow on their roads.
The snowbanks will become crustier and heavier in the coming days, as freezing rain is expected to start falling around dinnertime.
Environment Canada issued a freezing rain warning at 11 a.m. for Montreal, Laval, Longueuil and the Châteauguay and La Prairie areas, saying roads and sidewalks could become slippery as temperatures warm up to 6 degrees Celsius on Thursday and Friday. Temperatures will dip back down near the freezing mark on Saturday and the rain will change to snow. About 15 centimetres of snow is expected before temperatures plummet to a high of -14 C on Sunday.
The warmer temperatures were expected to cause river levels to rise with frazil ice causing flooding( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/laval-monitoring-river-levels-as-frazil-ice-forms-on-waterways ) for some residents along the Rivière des Prairies in Laval and Terrebonne.
Related
20 years after the Ice Storm: With more extreme weather expected, are we ready?( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/20-years-after-the-ice-storm-with-more-extreme-weather-expected-are-we-ready )
Montreal winter-driving guide: How to avoid sliding, sliding ... bang!( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-winter-driving-guide-how-to-avoid-sliding-sliding-bang )
CREDIT: Jason Magder, Montreal Gazette

