As thousands of children and school employees in Quebec return to their classrooms, questions are being raised about what role the ventilation systems in their schools will play in preventing - or contributing to - the spread of COVID-19.
Concern about the airborne spread of COVID-19, especially in Quebec's aging school buildings, has turned public attention toward the quality of indoor air and spurred a provincewide push to clean ventilation systems.
Those who work in the duct maintenance industry say such cleanings are long overdue.
Managers of government buildings in particular, they say, have tended to postpone ventilation system maintenance, leading to the buildup of harmful residue and reduced air circulation, which could amplify the risk of the virus spreading indoors.
Alain Dubeau, the president of Air-Net, a ventilation-cleaning business, has seen all kinds of moulds and fungi inside Quebec's vents.
"What we find inside, it isn't always pretty," he said. "It's not just dust."
As Quebec society began to emerge from the coronavirus-imposed lockdown, Dubeau and his teams busied themselves cleaning government buildings such as CLSCs and schools.
Ventilation inspections should be performed annually, he said. North American standards suggest duct cleanings should happen every three to five years. But they rarely are.
Building managers delay such cleanings, sometimes for more than a decade, Dubeau said, often because of budgetary constraints. Meanwhile, dust and moisture accumulate in ducts, promoting the growth of moulds and fungi. Sometimes buildup can become so dense that air flow stops. People start getting sick or, in the winter, managers notice their building is cold because the heat is unable to flow through the ducts.
"Then they're going to act," Dubeau said, "and say, 'Oh, maybe we should clean it.' "
Dubeau described a case several years ago in which, upon arriving for an assessment at a hospital, he saw an outcropping of fungus growing near the air intakes that fed intensive-care units and operating rooms.
"That's an example of a building manager who isn't taking care of the maintenance of their ventilation system," he said. "That's just one example among many others."
Neglected or outdated ventilation systems pose health problems.
"If you don't have a proper ventilation system, then people can get really affected" by allergens, dust and other particles, said Stéphane Perron, a physician who specializes in public health and preventive medicine.
The air quality inside Quebec's schools has recently become a particular concern. Students are now sitting unmasked near their peers in groups as large as 30. Many classrooms have poor ventilation or windows that don't open.
"If the air is stagnant, that's where the COVID - we're talking about COVID, but it could be anything - it has more chance to proliferate inside," Dubeau said.
Air-Net president Alain Dubeau has seen all kinds of moulds and fungi inside Quebec's vents. "What we find inside, it isn't always pretty," he says. "It's not just dust."
Distancing remains the best way to stay infection-free, Perron said. But keeping apart is difficult inside crowded classrooms and school hallways.
"Ventilation should never replace distancing, which seems to be the most efficient way to prevent disease," he said. "But if you have a proper ventilation system, it's only going to help."
Some aging Quebec schools lack mechanical ventilation systems altogether. In those buildings, opening a window may help.
"If you open the windows, you'll have more air circulation, so that's good," Perron said. "It's not as good as a properly functioning ventilation system, but it's certainly better than keeping the windows closed."
Even schools that have mechanical ventilation systems may not be well equipped. More than half of Quebec's school buildings are in poor condition, according to the government's latest 10-year infrastructure plan. Some of their ventilation systems are outdated or inefficient, and probably very dirty - though that's beginning to change. The education ministry has not yet responded to a Montreal Gazette question asking how often school ventilation systems were cleaned before the pandemic. To prepare for the return to classes, schools have rushed to clean them.
But the role a functioning ventilation system plays in reducing the spread of the virus is not yet clear.
Perron said the scientific community is debating what role aerosolized transmission - the kind of transmission in which someone can contract COVID-19 just by coming into contact with tiny viral particles that linger in the air - plays in the virus's spread. The vast majority of coronavirus transmission happens through the expulsion of larger droplets at closer range, propelled when someone speaks, coughs or sneezes.
The World Health Organization has weighed in.
"Aerosol transmission, particularly in these indoor locations where there are crowded and inadequately ventilated spaces where infected persons spend long periods of time with others, cannot be ruled out," the organization states. "More studies are urgently needed to investigate such instances and assess their significance for transmission of COVID-19."
In the meantime, the provincial workplace safety board, CNESST, recommends Quebec schools should "ensure the efficient operation and maintenance of the ventilation systems. Increase the fresh air intake provided by these systems, and in case of natural ventilation, encourage the opening of the windows, if possible."
Though the facts on its indoor spread are not yet entirely clear, the virus has fuelled anxiety over proper ventilation and promoted awareness of good air circulation.
Jacques Scott, president of Air Plus Montreal, an air duct-cleaning company, said he believes COVID-19 has played a role in the recent spike in business. In some cases, fear of the virus has prompted his clients to complete cleanings that were badly needed.
"I've seen businesses that were shut down during the quarantine, and when it's been shut down for a month and you reopen it, there's no danger of COVID being (in the vents) ... because everything would have died by now," he said. "But still, the fact remains that all the gunk that you have in there, it's absolutely necessary to clean that out."
Dubeau said he has noticed a shift in government priorities. Institutions are finally caring about the quality of their indoor air, especially in older buildings where it may have been poor and even unhealthy, with or without the coronavirus.
"I get the impression that COVID started to wake people up to the problem," Dubeau said. "The government is starting to become aware because the buildings are aging - the hospitals and the schools."
mlapierre@postmedia.com
All our coronavirus-related news can always be found at montrealgazette.com/tag/coronavirus
Sign up for our email newsletter dedicated to local COVID-19 coverage at montrealgazette.com/coronavirusnews
Help support our local journalism by subscribing to the Montreal Gazette here
Related
Teachers' union takes Quebec to court, demanding COVID screening mechanism
Opinion: Preparing our education system for a second wave

