'Get moving' on wet shelters for Montreal's homeless, advocates demand( https://montrealgazette.com/news/homeless-advocates-call-on-city-to-get-moving-on-wet-shelter-plan )
The city of Montreal is working on a wet shelter feasibility study exploring best practices in cities that have wet shelters in place. And while advocates say it's important to get the project right, they worry the process - which began under the Denis Coderre administration in 2015 - is taking far too long.
Last April, the city released a preliminary report on wet shelters citing 17 studies on the subject. By and large, the research suggests having a safe, controlled environment for problem drinkers is an effective tool for harm reduction. Mayor Valérie Plante made a further commitment in March as part of a $7.8-million plan to fight homelessness( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-to-create-950-housing-units-for-homeless-people ).
The current feasibility study is being conducted with Old Brewery Mission, Accueil Bonneau and the Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux (CIUSSS) du Centre-Sud-de-l'Île-de-Montréal. It will be published in April.
"When I heard the study would be coming out in April, I thought, 'Really? Next April? That seems excessive,'" said Matthew Pearce, executive director of the Old Brewery Mission. "There are some complexities, in a legal context, I'm not blind to that. But we need to get moving on this."
Analysis: Liberals aim for longer election campaign to destabilize the CAQ( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/analysis-liberals-aim-for-longer-election-campaign-to-destabilize-the-caq )
The province's fixed date law was supposed to take the suspense out of elections and level the playing field between the parties. But a lesser understood clause of the law - one that allows wiggle room on the length of the actual campaign - has suddenly become a factor on the big political chessboard.
On Tuesday, Liberal insiders confirmed the party is seriously examining a possible early election launch - it could be as soon as Aug. 23 or the weekend of Aug. 25-26. Until now, the conventional thinking was that Premier Philippe Couillard would kick off the campaign Wednesday, Aug. 29, which would mean a 33-day campaign.
The Liberals have their reason for wanting a longer runway. For one thing, it would mean their rival François Legault, leader of the Coalition Avenir Québec, has to face the media more often to answer tricky policy questions. A long campaign means more opportunities for Legault - who is leading in the polls - to slip up.
Premier Philippe Couillard speaks with CAQ leader François Legault at the end of the spring session in 2015 at the legislature in Quebec City.
Liberals quietly killed Montreal General expansion in 2014: document( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/liberals-quietly-killed-montreal-general-expansion-in-2014-document )
Health Minister Gaétan Barrette was all smiles when he announced a $300-million expansion( https://montrealgazette.com/news/modernization-project-will-lift-montreal-general-out-of-dark-ages ) of the Montreal General Hospital more than a week ago - two months before the upcoming Oct. 1 provincial election. But two months after winning the last election in 2014, the Liberal government quietly killed a $380-million expansion of the same hospital that had already been approved years earlier, according to a government document obtained by the Montreal Gazette.
The Montreal General would have a new, enlarged emergency room by now if the government had stuck to its original plans. In the past decade, however, staff at the Montreal General have complained that the hospital has fallen into disrepair through neglect, and some fear the latest announcement might be nothing more than a shallow pre-electoral promise, given that a feasibility study must first be conducted before approving the expansion yet again.
Marie-Claude Lacasse, a ministry spokesperson, acknowledged that the government had previously decided not to invest in the Montreal General expansion, but she suggested that such a decision was made almost a decade earlier. "The government never authorized a major project at the Montreal General hospital before this year," Lacasse said.
Mount Royal pilot project 'having an impact on safety,' group says( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/mount-royal-pilot-project-having-an-impact-on-safety-group-says )
Inadequate communication, bad planning and a lack of public transit have resulted in an overall loss of accessibility to Mount Royal, says a group charged with promoting and protecting the mountain.
"The presumption that eliminating cars will make the place safer - I don't think you can draw that conclusion, because it takes one bad driver or cyclist who doesn't observe safety rules," said Helene Panaioti, the director of communications, advocacy and community engagement for Les amis de la montagne. "This pilot project did not provide for road safety enhancement by any other means than by removing cars."
Since June, cars can drive up Camillien-Houde Way or Remembrance Rd. and park either at Beaver Lake or Smith House. They are not permitted to drive between the two parking lots, except when guided by security guards when one of those lots is full. Buses, pedestrians and cyclists can travel between the two sites. The ban is part of a pilot project the city has embarked on from June to October in an effort to improve safety at the site.
Panaioti said motorists disregard the signs that ban transiting traffic, even though police presence on the site has been beefed up. When the Montreal Gazette visited Mount Royal last Friday, 14 cars drove through the no-enter signs in the span of an hour, some driving by a police car with lights flashing to do so. Having cars driving through an area where they are not expected is dangerous, Panaioti added.
An almost empty Camillien-Houde Way is seen in an aerial view on July 19, 2018.
Hot summer gave Quebec farmers 'one of the worst seasons on record'( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hot-summer-gave-quebec-farmers-one-of-the-worst-seasons-on-record )
The June hay harvest at Marcel Groleau's dairy and cattle farm in Thetford Mines was 40 per cent smaller than usual due to a lack of rain, putting him in the rare and financially undesirable position of having to buy hay to feed his 350 cows. "Animals that are more fragile suffer in the heat, just as humans do," said Groleau, who is also president of the Union des producteurs agricoles, Quebec's farmers union, which represents 42,000 producers.
Quebec's hot, dry summer has plagued many of the province's farmers, particularly those who raise cattle, pigs, sheep and other animals who rely on hay, Groleau noted. Many reported hay harvests that were 60 or 70 per cent below average, forcing them to buy at high prices. Those without the financial liquidity to spend thousands on feed could be forced to stop production, and potentially go under, Groleau said. Roughly 80 per cent of farmers in the province are covered by crop insurance, but it remains to be seen if coverage will be sufficient. Growers of crops like cauliflower, broccoli, kale and romaine lettuce were hit hard as well, forcing food merchants to import the produce.
Strawberry and raspberry crops were relatively robust and above average in quality. But high temperatures caused them to ripen quickly, and with manpower shortages on many farms, much of the crop rotted before it could be harvested. Scorching temperatures kept many away from pick-your-own establishments.
Jake O'Brady and his dad, Sean, pick corn at Quinn Farm on Île-Perrot on Aug. 10, 2018. The weather has improved conditions for Quebec farms in August, but many farmers will still need financial compensation after being hit hard by the summer's prolonged heat waves.
CREDIT: Katya Teague, Montreal Gazette

