Three other Canadians were rescued and airlifted back to Kathmandu
Fall is normally a prime period for trekking in Nepal, but for two years in a row, tropical cyclones striking the Indian subcontinent have disrupted weather all the way to the Himalayan range.
This week, the passing tail of Cyclone Hudhud triggered freak blizzards and avalanches in Nepal, killing at least 25 people, including four Canadian trekkers who were on a mountain pass north of the Annapurna range.
Three of the Canadian victims were Quebec women - a guide and two customers booked with the Montreal tour operator Terra Ultima. The fourth victim, a woman, was travelling with another Nepalese trekking firm. Their names were not released.
In addition, relatives and friends of two Ottawa-area women travelling in Nepal, Virginia Schwartz and Jane Van Criekingen, said they had not been in contact with the two since Saturday.
Three other Canadians were rescued and airlifted back to Kathmandu, Nepalese officials said.
The three Quebec victims were a 55-year-old Montreal resident who was a tour guide and group leader, a 59-year-old traveller from a Montreal suburb, and a 33-year-old woman from Quebec City. They were part of a group of six who left Canada on Oct. 3 for what was to be a three-week adventure.
"We are in a state of shock," said Julien Passerini, director of operations for Terra Ultima. "We are a small company. We know all our customers personally. These are very, very difficult moments."
Meanwhile, in Ottawa, Mark Schwartz was trying to find the whereabouts of his sister, Virginia, a 37-year-old from Pontiac, in west Quebec, who was in Nepal with her friend, Ms. Van Criekingen.
Mr. Schwartz said the family last heard from his sister on Saturday morning and the two women were heading toward Manang, the district where the other Canadians had died.
The family has set up a Facebook page, hoping that people in Nepal could use it to relay information about the missing.
There was conflicting information about the cause of the deaths and whether the bodies had been retrieved.
The Trekking Agencies' Association of Nepal said the four Canadians died along with an Indian trekker in an avalanche in Manang district, northeast of Kathmandu. The five bodies were recovered, the trekking association said in a communiqué.
But Devendra Lamichhane, an administrator in Manang district, said a helicopter pilot located the bodies of the Canadians but could not get close.
"It's very difficult for a pilot. There's very heavy snowfall. It's very, very difficult geography," Mr. Lamichhane told The Globe and Mail in a phone interview from Manang. "Today we tried to send police and they could not get there. It is very, very difficult terrain."
The Nepalese army will resume searches Thursday morning by sending another helicopter, he said.
"We had lots of problems due to the weather. We are still searching and trying to help people," the trekking association's search-and-rescue co-ordinator, Keshav Pandey, told The Globe.
He said the Canadians died near Thorong La, a 5,400-metre-high mountain pass north of the Annapurna range. Thorong La is the high point of the Annapurna circuit, a well-trod trekking route. To reach the pass, visitors would have had to trek uphill for about four hours and would be at risk of acute mountain sickness.
Tim and Becky Rippel, whose Nelson, B.C., outfitting company, Peak Freaks, is leading an expedition in Nepal, reported that the Himalayas' snowline was lower this fall as a result of the cyclone.
The fall is normally good for trekking in Nepal. But the region has been hit by autumn cyclones for two consecutive years, Ms. Rippel said in an interview.
"We saw it coming off the Bay of Bengal and hitting India. You can pretty much predict what it will do," she said, noting that Hudhud's progress could be tracked as it made landfall.
While the weather has been unusual, she said it was the responsibility of tour operators to check climate conditions and delay treks until the snow had firmed up or shed off in avalanche-prone zones.
"Clients do pay when they go on a trip, they pay for risk management. So whoever was guiding them should have been aware that there was a big snowfall and you don't move."
According to the trekking association, three of the Canadian deaths were confirmed by their outfitter, Panorama Himalaya Trekking and Expedition Pvt. Ltd. The association said the death of the fourth Canadian was confirmed by another Kathmandu operator, Nepal Hidden Treks and Expedition.
"It was big snowfall on the mountain so many people are missing and killed," Nepal Hidden Treks team leader Harka Gurung said in an e-mail, adding that the company did not have more details because it had trouble contacting its group on the mountain.
Three yak herders were killed by a separate avalanche at Nar village in Manang, officials told Reuters. In neighbouring Mustang district, four hikers - a Nepali citizen, two Polish nationals and an Israeli - were also killed by a blizzard along the Annapurna circuit, district

