QUEBEC - On the same day the Legault government openly mulled over ways to block the funding, the English Montreal School Board dropped the idea of using federal money to help pay for its challenge to Bill 21.
But the EMSB said it has not changed its plans to battle the bill in the courts using its own funds, despite the ire of the provincial government over the last few hours - which one minority community leader has qualified as intimidation to crush democratic dissent.
"The cases are very much alive," EMSB spokesman Mike Cohen said in an interview. "Nothing changes. We had allocated budget long before we even considered applying for court challenges.
"People have to remember school boards have always had the option to litigate against a government. Now it will be provincial money only that will be used for this court battle."
Cohen was explaining the EMSB's sudden flip-flop on plans to make use of the federal Court Challenges Assistance Program (CPP) to pay legal fees in its case against Bill 21.
The Montreal Gazette confirmed Wednesday that the CPP had agreed to grant $250,000 in funding to the EMSB to help cover the legal costs of two court challenges it has filed against the Quebec government.
The CCP had specifically awarded the board $125,000 to fund its challenge of Bill 21,( https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/emsb-files-legal-challenge-against-bill-21 ) the state secularism law that bans teachers, judges and police officers, among others, from wearing religious symbols on the job.
But then a political storm erupted in Quebec City and Ottawa( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/emsb-receiving-250000-from-ottawa-for-high-profile-court-challenges ). By midday Thursday, after Premier François Legault specifically accused Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of meddling in Quebec's affairs, the EMSB backtracked.
In a statement, the EMSB said while it had made an application for funding and it had been accepted, it had not received any funding money in its litigation against the Quebec government and now no longer wanted any.
"The EMSB has renounced any funding it could receive from the Court Challenges Program," the statement said. "That said, the EMSB maintains that its power of management and control conferred on it by Section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms covers the power to make agreements with third parties, including the government of Canada."
"Recent events do not affect the EMSB's resolve to see to an end to its important litigation attacking the constitutionality of Bill 21 and Section 477.1.1 of the Education Act."
Asked to elaborate, Cohen said given the "political climate," lawyers with the firm Power Law, hired by the board to stickhandle legal cases, recommended dropping the applications.
Despite speculation the EMSB - which is under government trusteeship over governance issues - caved into government pressure, Cohen said it had no direct contact with Quebec City. The government-appointed trustee, Marlene Jennings, played no role in the decision, he said.
In slapping trusteeship on the EMSB in November 2019, Education Minister Jean-François Roberge allowed the EMSB to continue to operate its various legal challenges, including the one against Bill 21.
What Quebec didn't see coming was the possibility the EMSB would seek federal funding from the CPP, which Quebec City sees as a branch of the federal government.
Officials at the CPP were not commenting on the incident Thursday, but the organization rapidly became a political football kicked between the two capitals.
"I think Justin Trudeau insults Quebecers in financing a challenge against this law banning religious symbols, which is supported by a majority of Quebecers," a furious Legault said arriving for question period at the legislature.
"I ask Justin Trudeau to ensure this financing is not given to challenge Bill 21. It's shocking. I think it's unacceptable to see the federal government financing the EMSB to go against the will of the majority of Quebecers."
Legault dismissed out of hand Trudeau's explanation Wednesday that the CPP is an independent agency that decides itself which cases it will finance.
"Listen, a government can put a framework around an institution," Legault said. "This is no small matter. We have an organization suing the government of Quebec for a bill adopted and supported by the majority of Quebecers.
"Mr. Trudeau can't hide behind an independent program."
Legault went so far as to say he has asked Justice Minister Sonia LeBel to look into possible options including taking away the EMSB's right to access such funding.
"I will look at possible actions," LeBel said later. "I will reflect. If there are things we can do we will do them in due time, but I won't discuss them in public."
In fact, Dawson College professor and Parti Québécois leadership candidate Frédéric Bastien argued the EMSB is acting illegally in trying to obtain such funding. He said the Education Act says a board has to have the authorization of Quebec to enter into agreements with a federal organization such as the CCP.
The EMSB refutes that statement, saying the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms covers the power to make such agreements. The point became moot with the EMSB's decision to renounce the funding.
Later, Immigration Minister Simon Jolin-Barrette told reporters he thinks the board had made the right decision, but he was still irritated saying Ottawa should have withdrawn the money from the EMSB on its own.
Jolin-Barrette, however, recognized the EMSB is within its rights now to contest Bill 21 using its existing provincial funding.
But the incident has left a bad feeling with the leaders of the minority community who wondered if Quebec's heavy hand over the last few days is designed to intimidate and quash dissent.
"It's very improper for the ministry to implement policies and laws that compromise the community's constitutional rights and for them to impede the community in verifying whether those constitutional rights have in fact been compromised," Geoffrey Chambers, president of the Quebec Community Groups Network, said in an interview.
"It's possible we have a disagreement among good faith parties and that the courts have to decide, but in that case the courts really have to decide. For one of those parties to obstruct, impede or intimidate the other which has fewer resources is just not right."
He said such pressure doesn't necessarily have to be manifested in official letters, but can take the form of statements the premier makes in press conferences.
"Either way there is definitely intimidation going on," Chambers said. "They know there are constitutional problems with Bill 21 because they invoked the notwithstanding clause."
pauthier@postmedia.com( mailto:pauthier@postmedia.com )
Twitter.com/philipauthier( https://twitter.com/philipauthier )
Related
Jennings credited with bringing civility and co-operation to EMSB( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/jennings-credited-with-bringing-civility-and-co-operation-to-emsb )
We're the victims of a smear campaign by the CAQ, EMSB says( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/were-not-going-to-just-sit-there-and-take-it-emsb-says )

