Winter returned to Canada with a vengeance yesterday, causing deadly traffic pileups near Ottawa and Montreal and lashing the Prairies with bitter cold.
Four people were killed on the main highway between Ottawa and Montreal near Embrun, Ont., with close to 40 vehicles involved in a series of collisions.
Another major crash left at least six people injured and closed the busy junction of Highways 417 and 17 at Arnprior, northwest of Ottawa, for several hours.
In Quebec, one man died and 40 other people were injured in a massive pileup on the Trans-Canada Highway near L'Assomption, 40 kilometres northeast of Montreal.
High winds, combined with frozen road surfaces, were blamed for the pileups. Winds clocked at 112 kilometres an hour also derailed five cars of a freight train on a bridge over the St. Lawrence River. No one was injured, but the wreckage stopped some Montreal commuter traffic.
"There seemed to be a lot of misery from coast to coast. . . . There were weather warnings for everybody," David Phillips, senior climatologist for Environment Canada, said. "It was [likely]the worst day of the winter."
No temperature records were set, but the sudden drop left a lot of people grumbling, he added. The 10-day forecast shows the weather remaining steadily and unusually cold today before moderating early in the week.
"It would be cold based on this year's standard but, based on the 30-year record, it will be about normal," Mr. Phillips said.
Canadians suffered as a nation as the relatively balmy conditions enjoyed in January gave way in much of the country to lower-than-normal temperatures.
Winnipeg recorded wind-chill temperatures in the low minus-40s. The coastal areas, both west and east, suffered from unusually high winds, putting all of Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island under wind warnings. But the effects of yesterday's severe weather were most visible in the Ottawa and Montreal areas.
The deadliest incident happened at midday near the small town of Embrun, just east of Ottawa.
Police say a 40-year-old Ottawa man and his two-year-old daughter died after the minivan in which they were driving hit a transport truck. That crash set off a chain-reaction that involved 37 vehicles.
Also killed in the accident was a 60-year-old Ottawa man who died when his vehicle went under a semi-trailer and another man who died while en route to hospital. About 40 people were injured, 11 seriously.
Jason Baker told a CTV reporter that he was lucky to be alive. After his Isuzu Trooper hit the car in front of him, Mr. Baker said, he followed he first instinct, which was to flee. Firefighters said that may have saved his life.
"I look at it now and it's pretty badly damaged," Mr. Baker, 27, said of his vehicle. "It's actually under a transport truck, I believe. If I didn't move, that would be me and I would more than likely be dead."
Near L'Assomption, the scene of another deadly crash, witnesses said drivers were blinded by blizzards that triggered a 40-vehicle collision.
In some spots, rescuers reported seeing up to three cars heaped on top of each other. It took several hours, in glacial, windy conditions before all survivors could be extracted from the twisted remains of their vehicles.
Fierce winds in Montreal were blamed for tipping the freight train and ripping part of the roof off a grade school, sending tin sheets crashing onto parked cars nearby.
North of Montreal, up to 30 vehicles crashed, including empty tractor-trailer rigs too light to stay upright in the wind.
The wind, ice and snow were part of a storm that whipped across most of Southern Ontario and Quebec. The brunt of the weather hit Ottawa and surrounding areas yesterday, where fierce winds tore down power lines and snow and ice shut down highways and grounded flights at the Ottawa airport.

