Check this post throughout the day on Tuesday, Sept. 29. Questions/comments: ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
No plan to mandate masks in classrooms - Arruda
'The solution is in your hands,' Legault tells youth
Hospitalizations rise as Quebec reports 799 new cases, 7 deaths
'Go protest in a potato field,' Plante tells anti-maskers
Don't gather in parks with friends and family, city says
What could Quebec have done to better prevent a second wave?
What is and isn't restricted in Montreal during red alert period
More below
4:20 p.m. Recovery plan inspires confidence but Canadians like working from home for now: poll
The federal government's economic recovery plan has inspired some confidence that it will create jobs and a stronger economy in future, a new poll suggests.
But, in the meantime, the vast majority of Canadians who have been working from home are n0t eager to rush back to their workplaces as cases of COVID-19 surge across the country.
Read our full story
4:10 p.m. Montreal extends state of emergency
The city of Montreal has extended its state of emergency for another five days.
First declared on March 27, "the local state of emergency grants exceptional powers to deal with the pandemic," by, among other things, allowing for the mobilization of materials and human resources to fight COVID-19, the city said in a press release.
3:30 p.m. Ontario strip clubs, worker advocates say provincial shutdown is unfair
From The Canadian Press:
Strip club operators are voicing frustration over the Ontario government's move to shut down their establishments, saying the closure was ordered without consultation and treats the industry unfairly.
The province announced the shutdown late last week, saying it was needed to reduce transmission in high-risk businesses.
Mauro Mastrucci, who owns the Airport Strip Club in Mississauga, Ont., said clubs weren't warned about the order and argued the measure discriminates against the adult entertainment industry.
"It's totally frustrating," he said, noting that his club had plexiglass barriers, required customers to wear masks, and checked temperatures at the door in an effort to follow public health guidelines.
Two Toronto strip clubs made headlines this summer after COVID-19 cases were linked to the establishments. But Mastrucci said restaurants and bars have also seen cases and have only had to close temporarily while his industry has to deal with a province-wide shut down.
"How can they distinguish that it's more likely that strip clubs will be able to spread COVID-19 and bars and restaurants won't," he said.
3:15 p.m. Video: Should children wear masks in classrooms?
Dr. Mylène Drouin, the director of public health for Montreal, today said Quebec is reviewing public health measures that apply to schools.
3:10 p.m. Video: Are Montrealers following public health directives? 3:05 p.m. Quebec City mayor defends decision to boycott radio station that 'endangers public health'
Le maire Régis Labeaume revient sur la décision de la Ville de Québec de retirer ses publicités à l'antenne de CHOI Radio X, dénonçant le " discours de banalisation " de la station.
- ICI Québec (@iciquebec) September 29, 2020
2:50 p.m. Quebec unveils public-service ad focused on youth infecting older people
Aujourd'hui, j'ai un message particulier pour les jeunes.
Je veux vous faire réaliser que vous faites partie de la solution.
SVP essayez de convaincre vos amis. Évitons les contacts avec les autres pendant 28 jours.
Je sais que vous êtes capables. Je compte sur vous!
- François Legault (@francoislegault) September 29, 2020
2:05 p.m. Quebec's new measures include appeal to youth, adoption of COVID-Alert app
Following up on my live coverage, here's our full story, by Philip Authier in Quebec, on Premier François Legault's briefing this afternoon.
2 p.m. No plan to mandate masks in classrooms, Arruda says
Quebec's "latest numbers are worrying and the situation remains critical," Premier François Legault said at a press conference this afternoon.
The sharp rise in cases is leading to a jump in hospitalizations and deaths, Legault noted.
Noting that more than half of Quebec's new cases are among people under 30, he appealed to young people to be more careful and avoid social situations.
"If young people transmit the virus to their parents or grandparents, it puts lives in danger," Legault said.
His message to youth: "If we want to limit deaths, the solution is in your hands. Please apply public health rules and convince your friends to do so."
Legault also promised to unveil "financial measures" in the coming days to help businesses that will have to close temporarily when Montreal, Quebec City and the Chaudière-Appalaches region go on red alert on Thursday.
The premier said he will announce details about police enforcement - roadblocks and how officers will handle 1) protests in which people don't wear masks and 2) illegal gatherings in homes.
Health Minister Christian Dubé said the province will soon embrace the federal exposure-notification. The final details are being worked out and an announcement is expected in the coming days.
Legault was asked about masks in classrooms. He said public health has not recommended that Quebec change its decision not to make face coverings mandatory for children in class.
Some other jurisdictions, including Ontario, have mandated masks in classrooms.
But Horacio Arruda, Quebec's public health director, suggested it would be "very difficult" for Quebec students to wear masks for eight hours a day in classrooms.
He said the bigger risk is students congregating outside of school.
12:10 p.m. Youth, anglophones, health workers most affected by pandemic anxiety: study
Young people, anglophones and health workers have been the most affected by pandemic anxiety and depression, a new study suggests.
The study, by a team at the Université de Sherbrooke, found that one in five Quebecers reported having symptoms "consistent with generalized anxiety disorder or major depression" in the two weeks prior to the survey, conducted between Sept. 4 and 14.
The situation is even more acute in Montreal, where one in four adults reported such symptoms, the study's authors said.
"What we're seeing now in Quebec are levels of depression and anxiety that are considerably higher than what was observed pre-pandemic," researcher Mélissa Généreux said. "These levels are similar to those observed in Fort McMurray six months after the 2016 forest fires."
The study found that 37 per cent of adults aged 18 to 24 reported symptoms of anxiety or depression in the previous two weeks.
"It is concerning that a significant portion of young people are not doing well," Généreux said. "It is equally striking that anglophones are twice as likely as francophones to have anxiety or depressive symptoms."
More details here
Noon In reversal, Quebec moves to adopt federal exposure-notification app
After months of opposition, the Quebec government is readying itself to adopt COVID-Alert, the exposure notification application developed by the federal government.
The move comes as the province experiences an uptick in the number of COVID-19 cases, suggesting the province is in a second wave.
Read our full story
11:55 a.m. Montreal officials provide update
A live feed wasn't available earlier for this morning's press conference by Mayor Valérie Plante and Dr. Mylène Drouin, the head of public health for Montreal.
But it is now:
COVID-19 Montréal passe au ROUGE Montréal se trouve maintenant au palier rouge du système d'alertes régionales et...
Posted by Santé Montréal on Tuesday, September 29, 2020
11:45 a.m. Updated charts: Quebec cases, deaths 11:30 a.m. National Assembly speaker in isolation
MNA François Paradis, the National Assembly speaker, has announced via Twitter that he is isolation because his wife has COVID-19 symptoms and is awaiting test results.
Ce matin, mon épouse a ressenti des symptômes s'apparentant à ceux de la COVID-19. Dans l'attente des résultats de son test de dépistage, je demeurerai en isolement par mesure préventive. Je me porte bien.
- François Paradis (@fparadislevis) September 29, 2020
11:25 a.m. Hospitalizations rise as Quebec reports 799 new cases, 7 deaths
Quebec has recorded 799 new cases of COVID-19, the provincial government announced this morning.
Montreal had the most cases of any region, with 234. Next were Quebec City (169) and the Montérégie region south of Montreal (121).
The seven-day rolling average of new cases is now 690. It has not been that high since May.
Seven new deaths were reported. Two occurred over the past 24 hours, the others between Sept. 22 and 27.
The number of people in hospital with COVID-19 jumped by 35 to reach 247.
That's the biggest one-day rise in hospitalizations since June.
Among those in hospital, 41 are in intensive care - four more than the previous day.
"The big increase in the number of cases is leading to a big increase in the number of hospitalizations," Health Minister Christian Dubé said via Twitter.
"It is to spare our already weakened health system that we must do everything to limit our contacts and curb the spread of the virus."
After dropping significantly on Saturday, testing ramped up on Sunday, with 26,366 people screened. That's the last day for which screening data is available.
This chart shows the seven-day trend:
10:45 a.m. Legault, Dubé, Arruda to provide update
With three regions about to go on red alert, Quebec officials will hold a press conference at 1 p.m. today to provide an update on the situation.
I'll have coverage and a life feed here.
10:35 a.m. 'Don't ignore this call' - Public health launches contact-tracing ad campaign
COVID-19 ENQUÊTE Chaque personne testée positive à la COVID-19 est appelée par la Santé publique. On appelle ça une...
Posted by Santé Montréal on Monday, September 28, 2020
10:10 a.m. 'One address stays together' as Montreal heads into partial lockdown: Plante
Following up on my live coverage, here's our full story, by Katherine Wilton, about Montreal public health's press conference this morning.
10:05 a.m. No, Virginia, there will not be a Santa Claus parade this year
Santa Claus is not coming to town.
Montreal's Christmas parade has been cancelled due to the pandemic - and organizers in Sherbrooke and Quebec City are considering following suit.
Read our full story
10 a.m. Quebec City police investigate death threats against mayor after radio boycott announced
Quebec City police confirmed on Tuesday that they have launched an investigation after online death threats were received by Mayor Régis Labeaume.
The threats follow an announcement by the Labeaume administration that the city would be pulling its advertising from a local radio station that aired COVID-19 conspiracy theories and refused to run a public service announcement from the provincial government warning the public not to be taken in by "charlatans."
Read our full story
9:30 a.m. 'Go protest in a potato field,' Plante tells anti-maskers
"We're seeing the progression and it's accelerating in every Montreal neighbourhood, though the west is less affected," Dr. Mylène Drouin, the head of public health for Montreal, told a press conference this morning.
Montreal has been reporting about 240 new cases per day over the past week or so, Drouin said.
Most outbreaks are small, with 10 to 15 cases. There have been about 30 outbreaks in schools, 30 in workplaces and six in daycare settings, she said. Some are also occurring due to parties and get-togethers after sporting events.
Drouin said transmission isn't typically being spread by people in classrooms or offices. Instead, it's occurring in break rooms, lunch rooms or during carpooling or after-work activities.
Drouin also said too few young adults are coming forward to get tested.
"We are missing cases," she said, adding that anyone with symptoms or who have contact with someone who is infected should get screened.
Public health officials are launching a four-week social media ad campaign this week targeting young adults. One of the taglines: "Don't ignore this call"
Mayor Valérie Plante pleaded with Montrealers to follow health directives.
"We need to do efforts - all of us," Plante said at the same press conference. "That means no gatherings and no types of socialization."
She said gatherings in parks with friends and family are no longer acceptable, even if you're keeping a two-metre distance. Only people from the same household should visit parks together, the mayor added.
"If your friends ask you to go to the park with the kids, say no," Plante said.
The mayor singled out the Tam-Tams, the weekly outdoor summer party at the foot of Mount Royal.
"Gatherings like those we saw at the Tam-Tams last weekend are not acceptable," Plante said.
Plante was asked about a planned anti-mask protest in Montreal on the weekend.
She said people who protest without following health directives are putting vulnerable Montreal neighbourhoods at risk.
"In Montreal, we're not like that - we stand in solidarity," Plante said.
Her message to demonstrators: "Go protest in a potato field."
8:15 a.m. Montreal on red alert as of Thursday
Three regions in Quebec, including Greater Montreal, will be under the government's COVID-19 "red" alert status as of Thursday - a decision that affects some 5 million people across the province.
Quebec Premier François Legault made the announcement yesterday, calling the situation "critical" while detailing the measures that will be in effect during a one-month partial shutdown in red zones.
The measures will be in effect as of Thursday and last for the following 28 days.
Read our full story, by Jesse Feith.
8:10 a.m. What could Quebec have done to better prevent a second wave?
As Quebec health officials scrambled in late summer to prevent a flood of new COVID-19 infections, some doctors and researchers questioned whether the prevention measures would be effective. Now, cases have risen to levels not seen since near the peak of the pandemic.
When the second wave was still a bump, the provincial government's response lacked severity, several experts told the Montreal Gazette on Monday. A failure to prevent private gatherings in early September probably contributed to the new surge in infections, they said, which is prompting the government to institute new, lockdown-like measures in Montreal, Quebec City and the Chaudière-Appalaches region.
Read our full story, by Matthew Lapierre.
8 a.m. What is and isn't restricted in Montreal during red alert period We have a summary of what is and isn't restricted in red zones - Greater Montreal, Quebec City and the Chaudière-Appalaches region - from Oct. 1 to Oct. 28.
Read our full story, by Paul Cherry.
7:55 a.m. Montrealers can get tested at 18 clinics today
Montrealers can be screened at 18 test centres across the island.
You can check screening clinic wait times here
7:45 a.m. Quebec has more than 5,000 active cases
This was the situation across Canada as of last night, according to theCanada COVID-19 Situational Awareness Dashboard.
7:30 a.m. Subscribe to our nightly newsletter
Stay informed with our daily email newsletter focused on local coronavirus coverage and other essential news, delivered directly to your email inbox by 7 p.m. on weekdays.
You can sign up here
ariga@postmedia.com
Read my previous live blogs here
Related
Find all our coverage on the coronavirus
Coronavirus updates, Sept. 28: Quebec orders bars, restaurant dining rooms to close Thursday; home visits banned



