The 89th Academy Awards ends in a gaffe for the ages. See what else you missed - and catch up on the movies you still need to watch - from this year's ceremonies
The highlights - and lowlight
Call it: La La Land is this year's Best Picture . Wait, no - it's Moonlight . Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty, it seems, with Beatty having the wrong envelope in hand, had their Steve Harvey moment in erroneously announcing La La Land's mistaken win. Moonlight is this year's Best Picture. Barry Hertz breaks down that gigantic gaffe and the rest of Oscar night's biggest moments.
So how did Jimmy Kimmel do in his opening monologue? Not so hot. "Kimmel is like a slightly elevated Jimmy Fallon or James Corden - an affable yuckster with no real agenda, or even a point of view. Which is exactly what this year's awards needed." Barry Hertz weighs in.
Not able to watch live? See tonight's ceremony so far in photos. (Or the red carpet here, if that's more your thing.)
The other winners
Oscar goes La La for Emma Stone , this year's Best Actress In a Leading Role . Barry Hertz spoke to Stone about her now award-winning role at TIFF last year.
makes a late charge in the ceremonies: Casey Affleck takes Best Actor In a Leading Role.
Your Best Director : Damien Chazelle for La La Land .
Barry Jenkins nets another award as he wins for Best Adapted Screenplay . It also means another chance to read Kate Taylor's four-star review.
Manchester By The Sea gets on the boards: Kenneth Lonergan receives the award for Best Original Screenplay. Read Kate Taylor's four-star review.
from La La Land defeats for Best Original Song . You go Justin Hurwitz! Did you enjoy the music in ? How about the Oscar-winning Best Original Score for La La land from composer Justin Hurwitz? Thought so.
How are those Oscars pools doing? If you picked La La Land for Best Cinematography , you're doing alright alright alright.
Welcome, Netflix! The streaming service picks up an Oscar for White Helmets , which wins for Best Documentary Short Subject . (Spoiler: It is available on Netflix.)
is your Live Action Short Film winner.
Hacksaw Ridge 2, 1 - Gibson's film takes Best Film Editing .
In like a lion, but not that : The Jungle Book takes Best Visual Effects . Read Kate Taylor's review of the visually stunning film.
It's La La time: The nominations leader La La Land gets its first award for Best Production Design .
And the full-length Best Animated Feature Film : ! Fun fact: Watch it on Netflix Canada right now (but preferably after the awards).
A familiar winner for Best Animated Short Film : Piper , from Pixar studios.
The director of the Best Foreign Language Film was not in attendance: Asghar Farhadi won for The Salesman , but his absence was notable. Iranian astronaut Anousheh Ansari accepted the award on behalf of director Asghar Farhadi. "I'm sorry I'm not with you tonight," Ansari read in a statement. "My absence is out of respect for the people of my country and those of other six nations who have been disrespected by the inhumane law that bans entry of immigrants to the U.S." "Dividing the world into ‘us' and ‘enemies' categories creates fear," Ansari continued in Farhadi's statement, which concluded with a passionate defence of the power of film to create empathy "between us and others, an empathy that we need today."
Guess who's that much closer to an EGOT after tonight? Viola Davis takes home the Oscar for Best Supporting Actress for her role in . The film is the first big-screen adaptation of an August Wilson play. "I became an artist, and thank God I did, because we are the only profession that celebrates what it means to live a life," an emotional Davis said while accepting her statuette. Read more about the film in Barry Hertz's review.
Mel Gibson's war epic Hacksaw Ridge gets its first award of the night, for Best Sound Mixing .
Montreal's Sylvain Bellemare has won the Best Sound Editing Oscar for . "This award, by far, is a collective award made by people from many countries around the world, led by the Quebec team. Salut, Montreal," he said in his thank-you speech.Quebec's Denis Villeneuve directed , which stars Amy Adams as a linguistics expert who tries to communicate with aliens that have landed on Earth. Jeremy Renner plays theoretical physicist Ian in the Quebec-shot film, which also stars Forest Whitaker as a military leader. This was Bellemare's first Oscar nomination.
This year's Best Documentary Feature clocks in at over seven hours long: Read about more about in John Doyle's take.
Best Costume Design and BestMakeup and Hairstyling were up next: Congratulations to Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them and Suicide Squad .
The first winner of the night: Mahershala Ali for Best Supporting Actor for his role in Barry Jenkins' . Ali won for his first Oscar-nominated role, in which he plays a Miami drug dealer who mentors a young boy who is being teased and bullied. Accepting the award on stage, Ali thanked his teachers."One thing that they consistently told me ... is that it wasn't about you," Ali said. "It's not about you. It's about these characters. You are in service to these stories and these characters." Read more about the film in the Globe review by Kate Taylor.
The view from the red carpet
From Lucas Hedges to Ruth Negga, see who hit the red carpet on the way into the 89th Academy Awards.
All you need to know about Oscars 2017
Late night television host Jimmy Kimmel will be hosting the awards show for the first time. He's previously hosted other awards shows such as the Emmy's and the ESPY's.
leads the way with 14 nominations, tying and for the most nominations all time. and are tied for second with eight nominations each.
The Canadian headliners at this year's awards were director Denis Villeneuve () and actor Ryan Gosling ().
Also, three of the five films nominated in the category of best animated short were helmed by Canadians. Simon Houpt looks at how the Oscar-nominated Canadian animators represent snapshot of changing industry.
A big theme of the night was politics, as many in Hollywood have turned to political action following the inauguration of U.S. President Donald Trump. Mr. Trump's controversial immigration ban on citizens from seven Muslim-majority countries has already had an impact on some nominees.
Although nominees were announced on Jan. 24, the past month has been anything but quiet on the Oscars front. Barry Hertz tracked the buzz from nomination to close of voting and takes a look inside the hype machine.
The nominees, and The Globe's reviews
Best picture (winners in bold)
M anchester by the Sea
La La Land
Lion
Arrival
Hell or High Water
Fences
Hidden Figures
Hacksaw Ridge
Alex Hibbert and Mahershala Ali in Moonlight.
David Bornfriend/Elevation
Best director
Denis Villeneuve, Arrival
Mel Gibson, Hacksaw Ridge
Damien Chazelle,
Kenneth Lonergan, Manchester by the Sea
Barry Jenkins, Moonlight
Best actress
Isabelle Huppert, Elle
Ruth Negga, Loving
Natalie Portman, Jackie
Emma Stone,
Meryl Streep, Florence Foster Jenkins
Best actor
Casey Affleck,
Denzel Washington, Fences
Ryan Gosling, La La Land
Viggo Mortensen, Captain Fantastic
Andrew Garfield, Hacksaw Ridge
Best supporting actress
Viola Davis,
Naomie Harris, Moonlight
Nicole Kidman, Lion
Octavia Spencer, Hidden Figures
Michelle Williams, Manchester by the Sea
Denzel Washington plays Troy Maxson and Viola Davis plays Rose Maxson in Fences.
David Lee/Paramount Pictures
Best supporting actor
Mahershala Ali,
Jeff Bridges, Hell or High Water
Lucas Hedges, Manchester by the Sea
Dev Patel, Lion
Michael Shannon, Nocturnal Animals
Best original screenplay
Hell or High Water
La La Land
The Lobster
20th Century Women
Best adapted screenplay
Arrival
Fences
Hidden Figures
Lion
Best animated feature film
Kubo and the Two Strings
Moana
My Life as a Zucchini
The Red Turtle
Zootopia
A scene from the animated film Zootopia.
Disney via AP
Best foreign language film
Land of Mine , Denmark
A Man Called Ove , Sweden
The Salesman, Iran
Tanna , Australia
Toni Erdmann , Germany
Best live action short film
Ennemis Interieurs
La Femme et le TGV
Silent Nights
Sing
Timecode
Best animated short film
Blind Vaysha
Borrowed Time
Pear Cider and Cigarettes
Pearl
Piper
Best documentary - feature
Fire at Sea
I Am Not Your Negro
Life, Animated
13th
Best documentary - short subject
4.1 Miles
Extremis
Joe's Violin
Watani: My Homeland
The White Helmets
Best original song
Audition ( La La Land )
Can't Stop the Feeling ! ( Trolls )
City of Stars ( La La Land)
The Empty Chair ( Jim: The James Foley Story )
How Far I'll Go ( Moana )
Best original score
Best sound editing
Deepwater Horizon
Hacksaw Ridge
La La Land
Sully
Amy Adams, right, as Louise Banks in Arrival.
Paramount Pictures via AP
Best sound mixing
Arrival
La La Land
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
13 Hours
Best production design
Arrival
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them
Hail, Caesar!
Passengers
Best cinematography
Arrival
Lion
Moonlight
Silence
Best makeup and hairstyling
A Man Called Ove
Star Trek Beyond
Best costume design
Allied
Florence Foster Jenkins
Jackie
La La Land
Best film editing
Arrival
Hell or High Water
La La Land
Moonlight
Best visual effects
Deepwater Horizon
Doctor Strange
Kubo and the Two Strings
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
Analysis and opinion

