The 36th Just for Laughs may still be half a year away and its ownership still up in the air, but it hasn't stopped the festival from announcing its first major concert, and it's a significant one: Kevin Hart.
The fireball comic will be bringing his latest spectacle, the Kevin Hart Irresponsible Tour, to the Bell Centre July 27 for one show only. Tickets go on sale Wednesday at noon.
Hart is, without question, the hottest comedy star on the planet and one of the very few who can play the biggest rooms around. In 2015, Hart drew the largest paying crowd ever at a JFL event when he brought his What Now tour to the Bell Centre.
Hart went on to sell out eight arenas in the New York area alone and became the first comic to sell out an NFL stadium - 50,000 seats in Philadelphia - before taking Europe and Australia by storm. The tour ended up grossing more than $100 million.
The announcement of the Hart show should allay rumblings about the future of Just for Laughs. Clearly, landing Hart indicates that it is business as usual at the festival.
One would have to surmise that a star of Hart's stature wouldn't be heading here if there were any doubts about the fest's future and/or feasibility. Hart would have certainly been given strong financial guarantees before signing. Nor would any quality agent allow its most prized client to hop aboard a sinking ship.
The rumblings about the future of JFL relate to its founder Gilbert Rozon( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/gilbert-rozon-will-challenge-sexual-assault-class-action-suit-lawyers-say ), who is facing allegations of sexual assault and misconduct and has stepped away from the festival. Rozon's ownership shares have been for sale for a few months, and although there has been no buyer so far, it is rumoured that three American conglomerates - Viacom, 3 Arts Entertainment and ICM - are in the running to purchase them( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebecor-claims-it-has-right-of-first-refusal-in-any-just-for-laughs-sale ).
All of which is not to say that L'Affaire Rozon hasn't had repercussions for the world's biggest comedy festival. It has, but on the French side.
As previously written, following word of the Rozon allegations, TVA quickly announced it was pulling Les Galas Juste pour rire( http://montrealgazette.com/opinion/columnists/bill-brownstein-just-for-laughs-will-survive-without-gilbert-rozon-insiders-say ) from its schedule. France's M6 television network suspended broadcast of the 12th season of La France a un incroyable talent, a show in which Rozon was on the jury, and Radio-Canada announced that Rozon wouldn't be featured in new episodes of Dans l'oeil du dragon.
But the hardest hit of all for Juste pour rire was the creation of the Festival du rire de Montréal( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-comedians-plan-ethically-sound-festival-to-rival-just-for-laughs ), which has since been renamed Le Grand Montréal comédie fest. Founded by 50 of Quebec's best and brightest, including Mike Ward, Lise Dion, and Anthony Kavanagh, the upstart fest could also give a much-needed boost to francophone comedy in Montreal. Unlike the situation on the anglo side of the festival, there has been little evolution on the franco side, where Rozon had played a pivotal role in programming.
However, Rozon's imprint on the anglo side was almost negligible, and few in the industry believe he will have a negative impact now.
The Hart announcement comes two weeks after JFL revealed several free outdoor events, including the Beach Boys( http://montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/just-for-laughs-books-the-beach-boys ), who will be bringing their surf rock to the Place des Festivals in July.
Although the hosts have yet to be named, such JFL staples as the Ethnic Show and Nasty Show series have already been confirmed. The Ethnic Show will take place July 11-22 at Club Soda, while the Nasty Show will run July 18-21 at MTelus (formerly the Metropolis). Tickets are now on sale for both series.
In addition to the programming here, the festival team is primed for the 4th edition of JFL NorthWest in Vancouver, March 1-10. Heading up that lineup are some of the most acclaimed wits on the continent: Bill Burr, Trevor Noah, Mike Birbiglia, Maria Bamford and Jo Koy.
Hart is more than just a one-trick standup. He has also become a major force on screen, with his latest film, 700 Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle - also starring Dwayne Johnson and Jack Black - having become his highest-grossing yet with worldwide revenues of more than $700 million. Soon to come to the screen is Hart in the comedy romp Night School.
Plus, Hart's book memoir I Can't Make This Up: Life debuted at No. 1 on the New York Times bestseller list in 2017 and spent almost three months on the list.
Just to ensure he never sleeps, Hart is also at the helm of the LOL Network, his new digital platform that is developing comedy programming.
Hart also has history at JFL. He was a raw rookie and unknown entity when he first performed at the 2001 fest in the New Faces of Comedy series. He hasn't looked back since. In 2015, he was named Comedy Person of the Year at the JFL Awards Show. This will mark his eighth festival visit.
The Kevin Hart Irresponsible Tour comes to the Bell Centre, Friday, July 27 at 8 p.m. Tickets will go on sale Wednesday at noon, are priced from $49.50 to $125, and will be available online at hahaha.com or by calling 1-855-310-2525.
bbrownstein@postmedia.com( mailto:bbrownstein@postmedia.com )
twitter.com/billbrownstein( http://twitter.com/billbrownstein )
CREDIT: Bill Brownstein, Montreal Gazette

