Busy Thursday? Here's the day's news.
The Quebec government will block the province's association of dental surgeons from pulling out of the public health-care system( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-dentists-prepare-to-leave-public-health-care-system ). Health Minister Gaétan Barrette made the announcement in Montreal Thursday afternoon. Earlier in the day, the dental-surgeons association officially filed the paperwork to withdraw 2,000 of its members from the public health-care system. The notices were delivered to the offices of the Régie de l'assurance-maladie du Québec (RAMQ) and Premier Philippe Couillard. The withdrawal would take effect in 30 days. On Tuesday, the association asked Couillardto intervene in negotiations( https://montrealgazette.com/news/canada/quebec-dentists-threaten-to-leave-public-system-due-to-tense-contract-negotiations/wcm/4f3b0bd3-4d31-4c2b-a8b0-67b8c1d4b0c9 ) with the government, contending that the talks with Barrette are taking place in a climate of threats and intimidation. The agreement between the association and Quebec expired in April 2015. A large-scale withdrawal of dentists from the public system would affect about 620,000 people, depriving them of free dental care except in case of emergency. The association argues it has done its part in making compromises and accuses Barrette of trying to impose a cut in compensation to its members, whose average annual income is about $180,000.
Authorities are investigating after operating rooms at the MUHC superhospital were plunged into darkness( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/power-limitations-force-muhcs-glen-site-to-selectively-cut-off-central-air ). Apart from potential issues with at least one backup generator, there are limitations to the power at the MUHC's Glen site in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, the Montreal Gazette has learned. During a heat wave, the Glen site cuts off the air conditioning on purpose in the cafeteria and atrium to keep the clinical areas cool. During record-breaking temperatures this month, cafeteria workers have resorted to placing wet towels around their necks to cope with the stifling heat. Julia Asselstine, assistant director of communications and engagement at the MUHC, explained the rationale behind cutting off the air conditioning in the packed cafeteria used by employees, patients and their families. "In the event that the chilled water temperature gets too hot inside clinical areas, there is a predetermined sequence of load shedding that is automatically engaged by the building control system," Asselstine said in an emailed statement.
Electrical problems have bedevilled the Glen site since even before it opened, starting with faulty wiring that needed to be replaced in the ORs. In July 2016, a crow that was electrocuted on a power line in Hampstead indirectly caused a two-hour blackout at the $1.3-billion superhospital, resulting in the cancellation of surgeries as the ventilation and other systems rebooted. That same month, a power flicker lasting only a few milliseconds was enough to trigger the rebooting of the same systems, leading to an internal review to prevent similar problems in the future. Last month, in an incident reminiscent of the electrocuted crow, a squirrel that accidentally touched two wires( https://montrealgazette.com/news/unlucky-squirrel-caused-power-outage-muhc-network-failure ) in a circuit breaker box on de Maisonneuve Blvd. knocked out six servers in the Glen site's computer centre, which in turn caused a network failure for 45 minutes. The Glen site, like all hospitals in Montreal, has backup generators that are supposed to kick in during blackouts. On Monday, a gas leak just north of the superhospital on Girouard and Monkland Aves. forced Hydro-Québec to cut power for 8,000 customers( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/hydro-quebec-crew-deployed-as-power-failure-hits-muhc ) in the area. However, one of the Glen site's 11 backup generators failed to activate, cutting off power to several adult clinical areas, ORs and the emergency room for 51 minutes.
Quebec, a new report suggests, has lost hundreds of thousands of young people to other provinces in the past 35 years( https://montrealgazette.com/business/quebec-losing-young-people-to-interprovincial-migration-report-shows ). Between 1981 and 2017, Quebec lost 229,700 people below the age of 45 to interprovincial migration, according to a new report published by the Montreal Economic Institute. While the number of people under 45 increased in Quebec between 2010 and 2017, the province is still losing people to interprovincial migration, and report author Marcel Boyer warns that if things don't change, "we're going to face significant social problems later on." The report comes as employers in Quebec increasingly say they're facing a shortage of workers. "There is a major problem here. We're not addressing it sufficiently," he said. Between 1981 and 2010, the number of people under 15 in Quebec decreased by 177,300, a 12.6-per-cent decline, according to Boyer's analysis of Statistics Canada data. During that same period, the number of people under 15 in Ontario increased by 309,000, a 16.2-per-cent increase.
Robert Lepage's upcoming play Kanata has been cancelled( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepages-controversial-play-about-indigenous-people-kanata-has-been-cancelled ). The announcement comes in the wake of a meeting last Thursday between Robert Lepage, Ariane Mnouchkine and the signatories of an open letter published July 14 in Le Devoir. Kanata looks at Canadian Indigenous history, including the residential school system and missing and murdered Indigenous women( https://montrealgazette.com/tag/missing-and-murdered-indigenous-women ). However, the production has come under fire for a lack of First Nations' input in the play as well as the decision not to feature Indigenous actors. This latest controversy came hard on the heels of Lepage's now-cancelled production of SLAV( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/robert-lepage-breaks-his-silence-on-jazz-fest-decision-to-muzzle-slav ), which included songs created by black slaves performed by a mostly white cast. A statement issued Thursday morning by Ex Machina, Lepage's theatre company, noted that "the infinitely complex and often aggressive controversy surrounding (Kanata) has in the meantime reached the North American co-producers that were interested in it, and certain ones have now announced their withdrawal." It adds: "Considering what we recently went through, we certainly understand their concerns. But without their financial support, we are unable to finish creating Kanata with Théâtre du Soleil. Therefore, we are putting an end to the project."
CREDIT: David Rudin, Montreal Gazette

