A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
Just stay home: Montreal faces another weather warning( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/freezing-rain-ice-pellets-and-snow-oh-my )
It seems winter is testing us. And maybe even testing our emergency preparedness, with warnings from the SQ, Urgences Santé and others advising us to just stay home. After a respite from winter on Thursday and Friday, the national forecaster is warning weather conditions will get worse in the Montreal area over the next few days. Environment Canada updated a winter storm warning Friday, saying "hazardous winter conditions" are expected as the temperatures dip and the rain transitions to frozen precipitation. The rain will change to freezing rain and ice pellets, making a slippery base for 15 to 30 centimetres of snow expected to fall overnight Friday into Saturday. "Prepare for quickly changing and deteriorating travel conditions," the statement continued, adding that highways, roads, walkways and parking lots may become icy and difficult to navigate due to the ice and snow expected.
Concordia students 'appalled' sexual misconduct allowed to go on so long( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/concordia-student-association-appalled-that-sexual-misconduct-was-allowed )
Concordia University has reassigned courses that were to be taught this term by professors who have been the subjects of recent high-profile allegations of sexual misconduct while those allegations are being investigated, according to a notice sent to students in the English department by their student association. "We are deeply upset and appalled that this university has allowed sexual misconduct to harm students for so long in what should have been a safe and professional environment," says the notice, signed by the executive of the Concordia Association for Students in English (CASE). The notice informed students of a meeting held Friday afternoon by members of the administration - including Kate Sterns, coordinator of the Creative Writing program, Deputy Provost Lisa Ostiguy and Dean of Students Andrew Woodall - to inform students in the Creative Writing program "of remedial actions the university has decided to take, as well as to respond to questions." The notice also warned students that faculty members have a potential conflict of interest and recommended students not treat the meeting as a forum to share experiences, but rather as an opportunity to demand change.
Kayleigh Donovan is carried to the front door by her husband, Travis Fraser, of their des Maçons St. home in Pierrefonds, on Monday, May 8, 2017.
Montreal was ill-prepared for spring flooding, city report shows( http://montrealgazette.com/news/montreal-was-ill-prepared-for-spring-flooding-city-report-shows )
Outdated flood maps. Emergency vehicles sidelined because they had low floors. No inventory of city equipment and materials. Not enough inspectors to check flooded homes. A 911 system inundated with calls because the city help line went down for four hours. A city report shows Montreal was ill-prepared for disaster in the spring of 2017, when the island suffered its worst flooding in 40 years. The document, obtained by the Montreal Gazette, is to be made public next week. The 55-page report, by the Montreal fire department's civil-security unit, reviewed the city's response and includes recommendations on how to improve emergency readiness. The flooding began in early May when the previous winter's heavier-than-usual snowfall started melting due to warm weather and heavy rain, raising water levels around Montreal and other parts of Quebec. Then-Mayor Denis Coderre declared a state of emergency on May 7, the same day 300 members of the Canadian Armed Forces arrived to help with flood relief. Over several days, more than 430 homes were evacuated in boroughs and suburbs on Montreal Island's north shore, along the Rivière des Prairies.
Quebec gangster can leave halfway house, return home to Trois-Rivières( http://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec-gangster-can-leave-halfway-house-return-home-to-trois-rivieres )
One of Quebec's most notorious gangsters has succeeded in his efforts( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/timeline-raymond-desfosses-long-road-to-conditional-release-he-violated ) to have the Parole Board of Canada lift a condition that required him to reside at a halfway house for the past six months. "I am chained like a dog to a halfway house. So if someone wanted to kill me it is very easy for them to find me," Raymond Desfossés, 67, said during a hearing Friday morning at a federal penitentiary in Laval. Desfossés was addressing a question put to him by Michel Lafrenière, the parole board member who presided over his hearing, as to how he would handle the possibility of someone seeking revenge for the crimes that led to his 18-year prison term. Lafrenière said it is the kind of stressful situation that could prompt a career criminal, like Desfossés, to use violence to protect himself. Such a situation could put public safety in jeopardy, Lafrenière said. He has good reason to be concerned because part of his sentence involves how he hired Gerald Gallant, 67, a hit man, to kill six of his rivals( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/former-hit-man-tied-to-west- end -gang-prepares-for-parole ) between 1980 and 2001. While he was initially charged with six counts of first-degree murder and three counts of attempted murder, he was able to plead guilty to taking part in a general conspiracy to commit murder. On Feb. 20, 2014, his sentence for the conspiracy was combined to one he was already serving and turned into an 18-year prison term.
Raymond Desfossés was successful on Friday, Jan. 12, 2018, in his bid to have the Parole Board of Canada lift a condition that required him to reside at a halfway house for the past six months.
CREDIT: Ron Carroll, Montreal Gazette

