Despite the city of Montreal making progress in its attempt to clear more than 40 centimetres of snow that had fallen since Sunday, the ice left behind by that weather remained a real danger for pedestrians on Friday - so much so that Urgences-santé urged Montrealers to stay indoors unless they have no choice but to go out.
"We are asking the population to delay any non-essential trips (outdoors)," the agency warned on its Twitter account. "The number of calls received for falls because of ice is more than three times the usual number. If you can get to an emergency room or clinic, do so!"
Urgences-santé spokesperson Catherine Domingue said Friday morning's Tweet was resorted to after the first responding service found itself receiving 140 calls per hour Friday morning concerning injuries from falls on ice.
"Normally we deal with about 70 calls (reporting ice related injuries) per day," she said. "We are really at emergency mode today...It's extreme."
Urgences-santé is also asking anyone who witnesses a fall to make sure of the person's condition before calling 911.
The warning came after Thursday's surreal images of intersections turned into slush-filled swamps, pedestrians capering like mountain goats to deal with ice-covered sidewalks and vehicles plowing through bumper-high waves of rain and slush. Still, by Friday morning snow removal efforts finally seemed to be getting the better of a week that included snowstorms, freezing rain and showers better suited for spring than January.
As of 9:30 a.m. Friday, the city was reporting that 62 per cent of Montreal's streets and sidewalks had been cleared of snow( http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/deneigement/avancement ) - three percentage points higher than Thursday, and a jump that apparently included some extra efforts being carried out in two heavily populated boroughs.
Sud-Ouest and Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, both of which reported clearance rates of 48 per cent on Thursday, saw their numbers spike to 60 per cent less than a day later.
The borough with the highest completion rate - 90 per cent - was Verdun. Outremont had the lowest, at 36 per cent.
A snow-removal worker moves his vehicle onto the sidewalk and gestures to motorists to make way for an ambulance on Cote-des-Neiges Rd. on Wednesday January 23, 2019.
The overnight clearing blitz came after Mayor Valérie Plante acknowledged Montrealers had experienced a difficult week, as a weather cocktail that began with a sub-zero snowstorm Sunday transformed into a 15-cm snowfall Wednesday, followed by freezing rain Wednesday night and rain Thursday.
Plante said Friday that city crews are working very hard to clear streets and sidewalks. Eight ice breakers are among the machines being used in snow clearing operations.
"With ice removal it's a particular situation; yesterday we couldn't put sand or abrasives or break the ice until we cleared the water," she said.
"But we have to remember, winter is our lot in life. It always has been. We're adapting, this (latest) meteorological cocktail has been exceptionally challenging. We haven't exactly been lucky."
Friday's weather forecast calls for periods of light snow beginning in the morning with a high of -5 C and a wind chill near -16. By nightfall, the forecast low is -12 C, with a wind chill near -18 and a 40 per cent chance of flurries.
Christopher Curtis of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report.
This story will be updated.
Related
Weather wreaks havoc in Montreal: After the storm comes the ice( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/weather-nightmare-continues-schools-closed-treacherous-roads-amid-downpour )
Watch: Montrealers dodge slush puddles( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-montrealers-dodge-slush-puddles-on-jan-24-2019 )
Watch: West Islanders cope with mixed weather( https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/watch-west-islanders-cope-with-mixed-weather )

