This summer has overall been relatively hot with some days especially hotter than others. This Friday and Saturday will be hot and the humidity will begin on Sunday before the weather shifts back to high temperatures next week.
Simon Legault, meteorologist with Environment Canada says "starting on Sunday the humidity is going to be really intense."
"We can say we are heading into another heatwave, but it won't be of the same intensity as last week," said Legault, adding that last weekend was the summer's first heatwave.
A heat wave is when the temperature is over 30 degrees for at least three days and the temperature doesn't drop below 20 overnight.
Environment Canada has issued two heat warnings already this summer.
Here is what to expect from the weather this weekend according to Environment Canada:
Friday
We can expect a sunny day with wind coming southwest 20 km/h in the morning. There will be a high of 31, humidex 34, with a UV index of eight, or very high. The night will be clear and the temperature will drop overnight to a low of 20.
Saturday
It should be mainly sunny day with wind coming southwest 20km/h in the morning. There will be a high of 32 and a 37 humidex. The night will be clear and the temperature will drop overnight to a low of 22.
Sunday
There will be a mix of sun and cloud, with a high of 29. The humidity will kick in, according to Legault. There is a 60 per cent chance of showers during the day and the night, which will also be cloudy. The temperature will drop to 21 overnight. Southern Quebec could see thunderstorm showers, according to Legault, but it is uncertain for Montreal.
Monday
We can expect to start the week on a sunny note with a high of 32. The temperature will drop overnight to a low of 24 with a clear sky. According to Legault, we can also expect to have a high humidex on Monday.
Increased fire risk
The society of forest protection from fires also calls for cautionary measures in the next couple of days as a danger of fires will be a risk across the province.
The regions most at risk until Sunday are Nord-du-Quebec, Abitibi-Témiscamingue, Côte-Nord, Bas-Saint-Laurent, Gaspésie and Chaudière-Appalaches.
The society recommends using a fireplace with a fire screen with openings up to 1 cm in size to make a safe campfire.

