Whether he is putting in pink fibreglass trees or
? Ask Claude Cormier about his philosophy in landscape architecture and he's liable to pull out his business card. On it is the definition for "artificial," translated from the Larousse Dictionary: "Produced by human technique, rather than by nature; that which substitutes itself for a natural element."
In five years, his Montreal-based Claude Cormier Architectes Paysagistes has produced an impressive record of projects with a decidedly "artificial" feel.
Currently, the firm is working on bold interior and exterior plans for the major expansion of Montreal's Palais Des Congrès. The landscaping will include lipstick pink fibreglass trees. Then there is the rebirth of Place d'Youville, arguably Canada's most historic urban square, whose design harkens to a long-lost river. In the mean time, Cormier has also proposed a 10-kilometre-long "revalourization" project that will attempt to make an escarpment readable.
"We don't try to make things that look natural," the affable and articulate Cormier says in his office in a turn-of-the-century converted rowhouse in Montreal's Plateau district. "Our influences are pop culture, culture itself, art, any aspect that surrounds us in the city, or country, or suburbs.
"Our landscapes can still be ecological in the sense that they all contain aspects of a natural landscape. They are presented, however, in an unnatural way."
He sees his work in the same light as those who do theatre, architecture or fashion -- "we create the mise en scène."
In 1996-97, for example, Cormier dyed parts of the lawns at Montreal's Canadian Centre for Architecture vibrant blue as part of its The American Lawn exhibition because, he says, "the North American obsession with perfect grass deserved celebration."
At last year's International Garden Festival at Grand Métis, Que., he scanned the Reford Gardens' prized blue poppy beds to create a computerized pattern of blue pixels. He then manufactured square sticks painted blue on three sides, pink on one, and hammered them into the ground to create a sea of blue that mutated in colour as you glided down the paths. "The idea of the blue stick garden was to trace the evolution of our visual culture from impressionist brush strokes to digital outputs."
In Quebec City, he has proposed to make the Sainte-Geneviève escarpment "readable" by creating at both top and bottom, a continuous, artificially ordered border of oaks -- one every seven metres -- to frame a reintroduced forest.
This decidedly idea-driven approach to landscape might seem strange from someone who grew up on a farm in Quebec's bucolic Eastern Townships. According to Cormier, however, it is precisely the business relationship to nature inherent in farming that underlies his work.
"Nature was a resource, nature was not an escape; indeed, it was almost, well . . . boring." Forests provided wood for cutting. It was, he says with a shrug, a pragmatic relationship. "The ideal of the as a myth doesn't exist for me, so I am not afraid to turn it into a plastic thing and give it artificial colour."
Not surprisingly, therefore, his current proposed winter garden for Palais Des Congrès eschews the standard tropical garden for an artificial winter forest of leafless, fibreglass trees coloured lipstick pink, "a symbol of Montreal's inexhaustible joie de vivre."
After he left the farm, Cormier studied plant breeding at the University of Guelph in Ontario, where he earned his degree in agronomy before deciding that "genetics and I were not compatible." After getting his landscaping degree at the University of Toronto and working for seven years in Toronto and Montreal, he completed his Masters in Design at Harvard in Boston.
It was there that he studied under Martha Swartz, the scourge of insipid landscape design. A visual artist originally, Swartz had scandalized the profession with her use of Astroturf and, in one mall project, a glorious platoon of gilded bull frogs.
"She demystified the process of challenging preconceived conceptions," says Cormier. Swartz replaced a sense of doubt about trying new things, he says, "with the courage to believe in your own idea."
But Cormier's approach is about more than in-your-face bravado. A number of his major projects demonstrate, first, a consideration for a site's specific qualities -- botanical, ecological, geological and geographical -- and, second, a reconsideration in light of its history and sociology.
Nowhere has this generated a richer result than at Place d'Youville. A long, pie-shaped sliver running east from rue McGill, past Dan Hanganu's iconic Pointe-à-Callière archeology museum to Montreal's harbour, the square is split by an ornate 1905 fire station and lined by some of the city's oldest buildings. Most importantly, it is one of the continent's oldest meeting places. Originally, a river ran outside the city's fortified walls, with market stalls lining the banks and small boats using the waterway to circumvent the Lachine rapids. The river was vaulted over 1832, gradually became a sewer, the market square a parking lot.
Cormier, with Groupe Cardinal Hardy, has reversed the decay with a convincing design that is picturesque but interpretive. His approach, Cormier explains, was to create a general narrative that rejected any one period of history. Down the course of the now buried river bed runs a gently vaulted, landscaped spine that reflects the brick vault below. Gurgling water in steel channels spreading out from this central path hints at the river itself. Crisscrossing this path is a quilt of sidewalks fabricated from various materials.
"A quilt," Cormier explains, "is a construction of a single whole out of many elements, each of which has its own meaning." Thus, wooden walkways cross from domestic door to domestic door; concrete paths link to pathways through the city; and limestone sidewalks link cultural buildings. "In the middle, the granite promenade makes reference to the old sewage collector by becoming a collector of pedestrians."
Found objects -- like the Founders Obelisk, an original survey marker for a long gone bridge, a well and a piece of sculpture -- have been left in place, augmented by new trees and embedded shards of steel plates like those used to cover road construction. Ankle-high steel and granite fencing and waist-high lighting along the spine draw the eyes down to the pathway quilt that symbolizes centuries of movement.
"The thing about this project," Cormier concludes, "is the way it is an unmistakably contemporary design that still makes an honest reference to history without merely marking the past, a process that only makes public space banal."
If good sense prevails, the city will complete Cormier's design for the western section of the square, a particularly historic place where, in 1844, an English mob burned the Parliament of Lower Canada.
His latest completed work, done with Montreal's parks department, is the Montreal Garden in Shanghai, a 28,000-square-metre landscape with Saucier+Perrottes Architectes' technology pavilion at the centre.
"The building deals with modern Canadian technologies, so the landscape needed to deal with modernity. So, we decided to do a modern forest that could abstract Canadian culture and the sensations of our land -- vastness, humility, sameness and diversity."
The landscape features amoeba-like hills, planted with stands of poplar and a different ground cover for each -- English ivy, periwinkle and azalea. "This landscape," Cormier says, "attempts to represent the similar and distinct qualities of our different provinces and territories."
When asked why he has been able to do so many interesting, if financially modest, projects, Cormier laughs heartily, invokes his talented, cohesive team and then talks about having a passion for his work and a positive belief in the future.
"I do believe in the future," he says. "So we try to be progressive by being informed by history but adapting our work to today's constraints and ideologies, while also pushing forward ideas in what is an appropriate landscape. It makes us persuasive, and I guess it is that persuasiveness that makes it happen for us."

