A look at the day's events in and around Montreal:
"Bomb cyclone" causes flight cancellations at Trudeau International Airport( http://montrealgazette.com/news/bomb-cyclone-causes-flight-cancellations-at-montreals-trudeau-airport )
The "bomb cyclone" sweeping its way up the eastern seaboard Thursday has largely spared Montreal but it caused 101 flight cancellations at Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport. The storm - which battered the coast with freezing rain and snow - led to 70 cancellations to and from the United States as well as postponing 31 flights to and from Atlantic Canada.
Montrealers rally in support of Iran protests( http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-rally-supports-popular-uprising-in-iran-they-are-killing-people-in-the-streets )
About 100 people gathered on a street corner in downtown Montreal Thursday afternoon in solidarity with recent widespread anti-government protests that began last month in Iran. The popular uprising has grown to include demands for free elections, a secular state, and a free press. More than 20 protesters are reported to have died in the unrest and hundreds have been imprisoned in the last six days. In Montreal, protesters gathered peacefully on the corner of Guy St. and de Maisonneuve Blvd. Thursday afternoon and chanted slogans such as "Down with dictatorship" and "Down with the Islamic Republic of Iran."
Lac-Mégantic trial: defence warns jury against vindictive spirit in closing arguments( http://montrealgazette.com/news/lac-megantic-trial-defence-warns-jury-against-vindictive-spirit-in-closing-arguments )
In his last chance to address the jury, defence lawyer Gaétan Bourassa downplayed his client's role within Montreal, Maine and Atlantic Railway, casting doubt on what his actual responsibilities were the night of the 2013 Lac-Mégantic train derailment. Jean Demaître, the company's train operations manager, was the third and last link in the "chain of security" that could have prevented the derailment, Bourassa said in his closing arguments Thursday. "But the breaking, the cracking, of that chain of security" happened before Demaître, he said. Demaître, 53, locomotive engineer Thomas Harding, 56, and traffic controller Richard Labrie, 59, are on trial for criminal negligence causing the death of 47 people.
Two Montreal law firms seek to file class-action lawsuit against Apple( http://montrealgazette.com/news/two-montreal-law-firms-seek-to-file-class-action-lawsuit-against-apple-over-battery-life )
Two Quebec law firms are seeking authorization from Quebec Superior Court to file a class action lawsuit against Apple, claiming that its warranty policies violate Quebec's Consumer Protection Act. The application, filed on Dec. 29, comes after Apple admitted that it slows the performance( https://www.apple.com/iphone-battery-and-performance/ ) of some iPhone models in certain situations. The company said that's done to prevent unexpected shutdowns that result from aging, which makes batteries less effective. That acknowledgment, along with the price of Apple products, is evidence that the company is violating Quebec's Consumer Protection Act, said Joey Zukran, a lawyer at LPC Avocats.
CREDIT: Christopher Curtis, Montreal Gazette

