Updated throughout the day on Friday, Nov. 20. Questions/comments: ariga@postmedia.com
Top updates
Video: Montrealers split on Quebec's Christmas guidelines
Religious minorities say province's decision to allow Christmas gatherings shows double standard
Stay two metres apart at Christmas gatherings, Quebec says
'A normal Christmas is right out of the question' - Trudeau
Quebec reports 1,259 new cases, 32 deaths as hospitalizations drop
Province allows Christmas gatherings but bans Hanukkah and New Year's Eve get-togethers
Sign up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter
5 p.m. Have a good weekend
Thanks for reading.
I'll be back with another live blog on Monday morning.
In the meantime, you can follow all our coverage via the coronavirus page
And consider signing up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter.
My previous coronavirus live blogs are available here
4:30 p.m. Canada expects 6M doses of vaccine before end of March
Iain Stewart, the president of the Public Health Agency of Canada, confirmed Friday afternoon that Canada expects six million doses of two COVID-19 vaccines before the end of March, The Canadian Press reports.
There are four million doses of Pfizer's vaccine and two million of Moderna's in the mix, but neither will be delivered until they complete their final clinical trials and Health Canada approves them for use in Canada.
Stewart said there are negotiations right now with the provinces and territories about how the vaccines will be divided between them, but noted that for personal protective equipment and COVID-19 tests, the distribution has been done partly based on population and partly on other factors, including need.
4:20 p.m. Video: Montrealers split on Quebec's Christmas guidelines 3:50 p.m. Toronto moving into lockdown on Monday
Lockdown entails:
No indoor gatherings
People living alone can have contact with 1 other household
10 people max. outdoors
No indoor dining, restaurants open for takeout/delivery
10 max. indoors, outdoors for weddings
Gyms, personal services closing
- Lauren Pelley (@LaurenPelley) November 20, 2020
3:45 p.m. B'nai Brith slams Quebec's religious 'favouritism' amid pandemic
B'nai Brith Canada is urging the Quebec government to "work with Jewish community and religious leaders when deciding upon pandemic rules and restrictions that impact religious holidays, while also ensuring the health and safety of all Quebecers."
In a press release this afternoon, the organization said it is "very disappointed in the government of Quebec's lack of consideration towards the Jewish community, as it relates to the newly released plan on December holiday gatherings."
Premier François Legault "has not addressed the concerns and needs of several minority groups in Quebec, including the Jewish community," said Michael Mostyn, chief executive officer of B'nai Brith Canada.
"While we applaud the notion of a seven-day family quarantine in late December, it fails to allow accommodation for Jews to celebrate the eight-day Jewish holiday of Chanukah.
"The Quebec government must take the needs of minority communities, including the Jewish community, into consideration, and work proactively with these communities prior to the lifting or imposition of unilateral COVID-19 restrictions. There must be no favouritism. The premier must be the premier of all Quebecers."
3:30 p.m. U.S. officials worry about Thanksgiving spike as coronavirus surges
From the Reuters news agency:
U.S. health authorities braced for further increases in COVID-19 infections, hospitalizations and deaths on Friday, capping a week in which the spread of the novel coronavirus accelerated ahead of next week's Thanksgiving holiday.
The seven-day rolling average of new COVID-19 cases reached more than 165,000 on Thursday, while the seven-day average for deaths climbed to 1,359, more than any day since late May, according to a Reuters tally of public health data.
With hospitalizations rising across much of the nation, straining already exhausted medical staff, officials in more than 20 states have imposed restrictions to curtail the spread of the virus.
The White House Coronavirus Task Force coordinator, Dr. Deborah Birx, said the virus is spreading at a high rate across more than half the country and that Thanksgiving gatherings should be limited to immediate family members rather than a maximum number of people.
"I don't like it to be any number... if you say it can be 10, and it's eight people from four different families, then that probably is not the same degree of safe as 10 people from your immediate household," Birx told CNN on Friday.
3:10 p.m. Montreal cartoonist Michel Rabagliati's everyman Paul is where we all are: at home
When Michel Rabagliati was working on the book that would become Paul at Home, he had no way of knowing just how freighted with meaning that title would become.
The English translation of the Montreal cartoonist's 10th graphic novel - first published in 2019 as Paul à la maison - now finds itself landing in a very different world, one where domesticity, for many of us, is full time and enforced.
Read our full story, by Ian McGillis
In Michel Rabagliati's Paul at Home, Paul heads to a seniors' residence to visit his ailing mother.
2:50 p.m. Beloved Montreal holiday book fair pops up online
The Holiday Pop-Up Book Fair's new name - Read Quebec: Holiday Book Fest - signals that the 2020 edition won't feature the usual physical displays and in-person events.
Read our full story, by Ian McGillis
2:45 p.m. Pfizer is first to apply for U.S. emergency use for vaccine
Pfizer Inc said it will apply to U.S. health regulators on Friday for emergency use authorization of its COVID-19 vaccine, the first such application in a major step toward providing protection against the new coronavirus.
Read our full story.
2 p.m. Reader mailbag: Where are cases popping up in Quebec?
An email from a reader: "Can we see statistics for Westmount, or the South Shore or the West Island, the Laurentians, etc.?"
The Montreal public health website features a breakdown by borough and demerged city
The Quebec coronavirus site includes a breakdown by provincial region
1:10 p.m. Legault says Santa can distribute gifts if he wears a mask
J'ai donné la permission au Père Noël de distribuer les cadeaux avec un masque.
- François Legault (@francoislegault) November 20, 2020
1:05 p.m. Opinion: Legault's COVID holiday gift a disaster waiting to happen
"The idea that young and old alike will go into a sort of quarantine for a week before Dec. 24 and a week after Dec. 27 is a pipe dream."
Read the full column, by Bill Brownstein.
12:50 p.m. Stay two metres apart at Christmas gatherings, Quebec says
On the province's coronavirus page about the holidays, the government says that from Dec. 24 to Dec. 27, "participation in private gatherings is allowed."
Under the rules, gatherings must be limited to not more than 10 people.
"Individuals from different households must always remain two metres apart," the rules stipulate.
"It will be especially important to display the utmost rigour in the case of individuals 70 years of age and over, those suffering from chronic diseases or those whose immune systems are weakened or deficient."
In addition, the following individuals must avoid participating in gatherings:
Anyone who has COVID-19
Anyone who is isolating after coming into contact with a case of COVID-19, regardless of whether the person is displaying symptoms
Anyone displaying symptoms, regardless of whether the person has been tested
Anyone who has been tested for COVID-19 and is awaiting the result
Quebec has also published a calendar to help illustrate its holiday plan.
It shows the period during which people should self-isolate before and after the four days when Christmas gatherings are allowed.
12:45 p.m. Updated charts: Quebec cases, deaths
12:15 p.m. 'A normal Christmas is right out of the question' - Trudeau
Speaking from outside his home in Ottawa, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau addressed Canadians this afternoon.
"We have a long winter ahead," he said. "As the weather drives us indoors, we are really in danger of seeing more transmission and far too many more deaths. It will be tough, but we know what we have to do."
He added: "A normal Christmas, quite frankly, is right out of the question."
A journalist asked about reports that some Liberal MPs are not happy that Quebec will allow holiday get-togethers of up to 10 people.
In response, Trudeau said he understands why Premier François Legault is allowing gatherings over a four-day period around Christmas.
"I think Premier Legault is doing all he can to recognize the reality in which people live," Trudeau said.
Is it wise to allow people to get together amid the pandemic?
Christmas is still a way off and much can change in the meantime, Trudeau responded.
"What kinds of limits we have in place (at Christmas) will depend a lot on what we do right now, so over the coming weeks let's tighten up, let's be careful. We've done this before, we can do it again."
British Columbia has urged Trudeau to ask Canadians not to travel between provinces.
Asked if he will restrict interprovincial travel, the prime minister said he is telling people not to travel if they don't have to.
11:55 a.m. Immigration system slowed sharply during pandemic's first months
New data is painting a stark picture of how the shutdown of the immigration system due to the COVID-19 pandemic has affected thousands of lives, The Canadian Press is reporting.
The figures show approvals for immigration applications fell by more than half in the months between March and August when compared to the first two months of 2020.
At the same time, the number of extensions given to people with existing permits skyrocketed. The data was tabled in the House of Commons in response to a question from NDP immigration critic Jenny Kwan.
She says extensions need to be made automatic so Immigration Department staff can focus on new files and avoid the risk of a backlog that could take years to clear.
The information obtained by the NDP shows that at the end of March, the department was operating at 38-per-cent capacity but is now nearing 90 per cent.
11:30 a.m. Religious minorities say Quebec's decision to allow Christmas gatherings shows a double standard
Some leaders of Quebec's religious minorities are questioning the wisdom of allowing gatherings over the Christmas holidays.
The Legault government is adopting a double standard by allowing gatherings for four days over Christmas, said Yusuf Faqiri, a representative of the Conseil national des musulmans canadiens.
"There needs to be consistency," Faqiri said. "Members of the Jewish and Muslim communities have followed the rules, as we should, but why is there a double standard? It's very disappointing."
Read our full story, by Katherine Wilton.
11:05 a.m. Quebec reports 1,259 new cases, 32 deaths as hospitalizations drop
Quebec's caseload increased by more than 1,200 again on Friday, with 32 additional deaths reported - but hospitalizations fell.
The province recorded 1,259 new cases of COVID-19, according to the latest government update.
That's 52 more than Thursday.
Montreal added the most new infections of any region - 294, followed by Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean (213) and Montérégie (159).
Of the 32 deaths, nine occurred over the past 24 hours. Twenty-two others occurred between Nov. 13 and 18, and one on an unknown day.
Two deaths previously attributed to COVID-19 have been removed from the death toll.
The number of people in the hospital with COVID-19 dropped by 27. The new total: 624.
Among those hospitalized, 96 are in intensive care - five fewer than the previous day.
On Wednesday, Quebec conducted 34,703 tests. That's the last day for which screening data is available.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, Quebec has reported 129,699 cases and 6,774 deaths linked to COVID-19.
10:45 a.m. Resto resilience: How chefs are combatting the second wave
With lowered revenue, ongoing expenses and government subsidies dwindling, you won't hear a lot of restaurants say they're doing wonderfully these days.
And yet, plenty of places are innovating, offering everything from heat-and-serve tasting menus to comfort food classics for takeout and delivery.
Read our full story, by Amie Watson.
Chef-owner Aaron Langille makes a duck breast ham with fermented cabbage and homemade ketchup on hotteok-inspired bread sandwich at his Le Diplomate restaurant in Mile Ex.
10:15 a.m. Hospital capacity could be surpassed outside Montreal by mid-December
With cases on the rise, there is a risk that hospitalizations outside Greater Montreal could exceed hospital capacities over the next month.
That's one of the conclusions of the latest weekly projection by public health researchers at the Institut national d'excellence en santé et en services sociaux.
"The data suggest a less marked increase in hospitalizations than expected in Montreal and adjacent regions, so hospital capacity overruns are not expected in these regions for the next four weeks," the institute said this morning.
"However, in other regions of Quebec the increase in projected hospitalizations is higher. Thus, a risk of exceeding capacities cannot be excluded, in particular because of outbreaks observed" in seniors' residences.
"Although the situation has been fairly stable over the past few weeks, increasingly high risks of hospital capacity overruns are starting to emerge, especially in certain regions outside of Montreal," Health Minister Christian Dubé said.
"With the holidays ahead, it remains crucial to be even more disciplined and to do everything to further protect the most vulnerable.
"The situation remains under control, but our room for manoeuvre is thinning, and that is why I invite the entire population to redouble their efforts for the coming weeks."
#COVID19 Données au 17 nov : @INESSS_Qc montre une ?? de 27% du risque des hospit. On prévoit ainsi que les capacités hospit. pourraient être dépassées à la mi-déc. hors du Grand MTL. On doit continuer nos efforts pour éviter d'atteindre cette capacité.
- Christian Dubé (@cdube_sante) November 20, 2020
9:50 a.m. Cases are soaring in Canada
These charts are from a document the Public Health Agency of Canada published this morning.
They show the current situation in Canada, longer-range forecasts and a comparison with other countries.
9:40 a.m. Canada could see 60,000 daily cases by year-end, projections show
From The Canadian Press:
Canada's chief public health officer says there's "urgency" to bringing infections down as officials released dire new forecasts indicating that COVID-19 case counts have far surpassed levels seen during the first wave.
Dr. Theresa Tam says COVID-19 cases could skyrocket to 60,000 per day by the end of the year if Canadians increase their contact rates.
The modelling predicts that at current rates of contact, Canada is careening towards a surge of more than 20,000 cases per day by the end of December.
But if socialization increases, the projections indicate that as 2020 draws to a close, Canada could see twelvefold increase from the current level of around 5,000 cases per day, which is already straining the health-care system in some regions.
The forecasts predict that at current rates Canada's case total could land between 366,500 and 378,600 and the death toll could fall between 11,870 and 12,120 by the end of the month.
Currently, Tam says an average of 4,800 cases are being reported daily - about a 15 per cent increase compared to last week.
The data says the percentage of people testing positive has increased to about 6.5 per cent, above the World Health Organization's benchmark of five per cent.
Tam says this could indicate that Canada is not testing enough, and is a clear sign that the spread of the virus is accelerating.
Tam says there are about 52,000 active cases in Canada to date, with a cumulative tally of more 315,000 cases.
Still, Tam says that amounts to less than one per cent of the population that has tested positive, meaning the vast majority of Canadians are still susceptible to infection.
9:30 a.m. Quebec allows Christmas parties over four days, adjusts holiday breaks for students
Late yesterday afternoon, Premier François Legault announced Quebec's pandemic Christmas plan
People will be allowed to congregate in groups of 10, be they family members or friends, from Dec. 24 to 27.
And there will be some remote learning for students before they go on their Christmas break, and high school students will get an extra week off in January.
Reporter René Bruemmer has the details in our full story
Columnist Allison Hanes, for her part, writes that in attempting to accommodate every family scenario, "there is a risk of encouraging overindulgence we will all pay for in the new year."
9:25 a.m. Quebec will not allow Hanukkah or New Year's Eve gatherings, Legault says 9:20 a.m. Trudeau will conduct briefings back at his home as cases surge
To underscore the importance of minimizing contacts, today Prime Minister Justin Trudeau will conduct a news conference outside his home, Rideau Cottage - the site of his daily briefings during the first wave of the deadly pandemic last spring.
Read our full story.
9:15 a.m. Here's where Montrealers can get tested today
Montrealers can be screened at test centres across the island.
You can check screening clinic wait times here
8:45 a.m. Canada saw 4,600 new cases, 79 deaths yesterday
This was the situation across Canada as of last night, according to the Canada COVID-19 Situational Awareness Dashboard.
8:30 a.m. Sign up for our free nightly coronavirus newsletter
Stay informed with our daily email newsletter focused on local coronavirus coverage and other essential news, delivered directly to your email inbox by 7 p.m. on weekdays.
You can sign up here
ariga@postmedia.com
Read my previous live blogs here
Related
Coronavirus updates, Nov. 19: Quebec allows 10-person Christmas gatherings, extends high school break by one week
Coronavirus updates, Nov. 18: Quebec considers extending school break as Ontario scraps idea

