The number of deaths in southern Quebec linked to the ongoing heat wave climbed to 18 as of Wednesday night.
In Montreal, the heat wave had claimed 12 lives, doubling the total from the day before. The victims were all between the ages of 50 and 80.
Urgences-santé pleaded with the public to call 911 only in case of a genuine emergency, and Mayor Valérie Plante called on Montrealers to look out for neighbours vulnerable to the effects of the recordbreaking temperatures. Dr. Mylène Drouin, head of the regional health authority, said the deaths were linked to the extreme heat and noted that Urgencessanté had logged the same jump in ambulance transports as had been recorded during the deadly heat wave of 2010, when more than 100 people died in the Montreal area.
While every death will be investigated, Drouin said that "for the moment, they conform exactly to the characteristics we've described - people with chronic illness, mental health problems, people living alone, people living in apartment blocks between four to six storeys and without air conditioning, those living in high heat areas of the city. These are the same criteria we've been using with our partners to decide where to conduct door-to-door checks."
Montreal's civil protection agency has launched a door-todoor campaign to check on those deemed most vulnerable to the heat to ensure their safety and provide tips on how to stay safe during the heat wave. An emergency co-ordination centre has also been set up to monitor the situation on a daily basis and react accordingly.
Despite those measures, Plante reminded Montrealers on Wednesday to show solidarity with their more vulnerable neighbours and take the time to ensure they were safe.
"If you know people with respiratory problems or people who are elderly, don't hesitate to visit them or give them a phone call to see if they need anything," she said during a meeting of the city's executive committee.
Plante also said the city had prolonged operating hours of local pools and community centres equipped with air conditioning.
The heat wave has triggered a wave of calls to 911 - and apparently stretched the resources of Urgences-santé to the limit, compelling the paramedic service to urge citizens to take some simple precautions to deal with the heat rather than wait until they need an ambulance.
Between midnight and 7 p.m.
Wednesday, Urgences-santé had received 1,100 calls - 30 per cent more than usual - from citizens in Laval and Montreal, said spokesperson Jean-François Coornaert. Of those calls, Coornaert said only 18 were "directly related" to the extreme weather, while many others were "indirectly related," with patients citing respiratory issues, among others.
Since the heat wave began last Saturday, Urgences-santé has received approximately 1,200 calls per day. The agency says that some genuine emergency-call responses have been delayed because of the number of non-urgent calls flooding 911. The agency has increased the number of paramedics on the road, and some are working overtime to handle the workload. It is pleading with citizens confronted with minor health problems to call the 811 health-information line rather than the 911 emergency line where every second counts.
"What we're experiencing right now is pretty extraordinary," said Environment Canada meteorologist Alexandre Parent.
Parent said forecasts are still pointing to the heat breaking by Friday morning, when temperatures will return to seasonal norms, around 25 C.
"The end of a heat wave is pretty easy to forecast. There's no chance that it's going to be delayed by a day or two," he said. "On Friday morning when people go out of their houses to go to work, they're really going to feel a different air mass."
While temperatures might go up again at the beginning of next week, Parent said the 30 C weather will not be anywhere near as bad as the current spell, with humidity levels much lower than what we're currently experiencing.
"The chances of experiencing something like that again are, however, not zero in July, but pretty low."
In Quebec City, Premier Philippe Couillard praised the work done by health professionals during the heat wave.
"It's tragic, but each time there is a heat wave like this - and by the way, we're going to have more of them because of climate change - it is the weak and vulnerable who are affected first," he said. "Public health authorities - particularly in Montreal - have taken the matter in hand very well. We have to make sure that our elderly in particular are well hydrated, that they have access to air-conditioned areas, even if it's just to cool off.
"The good news is that according to the weather reports, this heat wave will break in a few days. But we have to expect episodes like this every year."
Meanwhile, in the Eastern Townships, as many as five deaths are suspected of being linked to the extreme heat. One death in the Mauricie region is also suspected as having been caused by the heat.
Last Friday, on the eve of the heat wave, the Société de transport de Montréal announced it will hand out 40,000 free, two-way tickets to ride the transit system in an effort to reduce the smog expected to accompany the high temperatures.
But the city of Montreal's airquality website suggests that while air quality never dropped below the level of "acceptable" when the humidex stood at 44 C on Saturday, Sunday and Monday, the quality actually began to improve since Tuesday, being recorded as "good" as of Wednesday morning. Presse Canadienne Montreal Gazette contributed to this report
CREDIT: The Gazette

