Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac will rebuild its controversial dike.
The Quebec government announced on Friday that it has given the town the go-ahead to rebuild and even raise the dike that failed on April 27.
Environment Minister Benoit Charette made the announcement in Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac with other cabinet ministers.
"Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac will have the support of the (environment) ministry to move ahead as quickly as possible with the necessary work on the dike," Charette said in a statement that was released by the government.
The statement also assured the ministry's personnel will help the town's council and residents in the coming months.
The work should be completed by the spring of 2020, the government says.
"Since the beginning of this episode of exceptional floods, I contended that the Quebec government will be there to support the victims," Public Security Minister Geneviève Guilbault said in the statement.
"However, now that the recovery phase is underway in Ste-Marthesur-le-Lac, we have had to make known as quickly as possible the government decision concerning the dike. Today, we want to make it clear to the local population that we agree with (the town). The dike plays a crucial role in flood protection in Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac and it can be rebuilt as soon as possible."
The dike was built in 1976, a long grassy mound of earth and gravel pushed up against the shoreline to keep flood waters at bay.
It failed when a weak point crumbled under the pressure of a lake swollen to record levels. The waters rushed through, creating a channel roughly 20 metres wide - large enough to flood one-third of the town of 18,000 within hours. More than 2,500 homes were inundated, and 6,500 people fled.
In the aftermath of the disaster, many were critical of the city, saying the dike should never have been built in the first place.
"There is no valid excuse for humans to build in that spot," said hydrologist François Brissette of École de technologie supérieure.
"The reason they are protected by dikes is because their houses are built in a lake. For a hydrologist, a flood plain is considered part of a lake - it's where a lake can stock its excess water when the floods come."
While some Ste-Marthe residents have been permitted to return home, there is still a threat of flooding throughout Quebec.
Friday's rain was expected to add to the thaw of ice and snow to raise the water levels of the lakes and rivers up north that feed into the Ottawa River's system.
Many reservoirs in the Abitibi-Témiscamingue region were at capacity, according to a statement by the Ottawa River Regulation Planning Board.
The board said it expected levels to rise, but in the Montreal and Ottawa areas they are not expected to surpass the first peak of river levels reached last week.
While the city of Montreal lifted its state of emergency this week, Pierrefonds-Roxboro Mayor Jim Beis said authorities are still monitoring the situation closely, and urged people not to take away sandbags or undo any measures to protect their homes from a flood. René Bruemmer of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report. Postmedia News
CREDIT: The Gazette

