Summer has finally arrived and Montreal is in the middle of a heat wave, but I'm tethered to the television.
It's the middle of the World Cup, which only comes around every four years, and it's getting down to the wire. After 32 teams were whittled down to 16 for the knockout round, we're now on the verge of the quarter-finals. Is your team still in the competition? That's the thing about Montreal. Canada doesn't have a horse in this race, so when it comes to who we support, we are the sum of our varied and diverse parts.
Maybe you back the country where you were born. Maybe it's where your ancestors came from. Maybe it's a place you've visited and liked. Maybe you've adopted a team based on a player you admire. Maybe you've been moved by an improbable backstory - for the human drama at the tournament is sometimes more compelling than what happens on the field.
The Icelandic coach who moonlights as a dentist? The Iranian keeper who was homeless for a time blocking a Cristiano Ronaldo penalty kick? Senegal's joyful pregame dance warm-up? Sometimes the real heroes, those who capture hearts and minds, turn out not to be the Neymars and the Lionel Messis.
Yes, there is drama aplenty, and sometimes of the soap-operatic kind. Take Argentina's early meltdown and quest to recapture its mojo, while cementing Messi's legacy. Iconic veteran Diego Maradona's antics in the stands and health scares made for a riveting subplot.
There's always plenty of controversy: over video-assisted reviews, questionable calls, or stoppage time running long when football powerhouses were on the ropes.
The biggest controversy of all may be how Russia ended up playing host. The awarding of the games to Russia by FIFA, soccer's world governing body, was the result of an epic corruption scandal uncovered by former British spy Christopher Steele of "pee tape" fame and pursued by former FBI director James Comey. And there's no doubt the World Cup is a PR opportunity for Russian strongman Vladimir Putin.
Having to look the other way at the unsavoury politics that too often sully the sport is the downside of soccer. The darkest moment of the Russian World Cup was surely was when Egyptian superstar Mohamed Salah was hung out to dry by his national team, who set up shop in Chechnya and let notorious dictator Ramzen Kadyrov cosy up to and embarrass the world's most talented Muslim athlete.
There were other lows, too, like death threats and slurs directed at Swedish player Jimmy Durmaz for a mistake that resulted in a winning goal for Germany. Never mind Durmaz was born in Sweden, he was assailed as an "immigrant" and "suicide bomber." Never mind that Sweden has reached the quarter-finals and Germany went home early. Such attacks betray an ugly side to the beautiful game that should not be tolerated.
The World Cup is supposed to be fun, a chance to join with your compatriots or fellow partisans to cheer on your team, celebrate success, or commiserate in defeat. Sure there's a bit of nationalistic jingoism to it, waving flags and sporting your colours on game days, but in Montreal, it's generally harmless fun.
If you're not watching, you can often tell who won by who's doing victory laps or which bar's patrons have spilled out into the streets to revel. Little Italy is pretty quiet these days, since the Azzuri failed to qualify, but Spanish, Portuguese, French, Brazilian, Argentine, Colombian, Tunisian and Moroccan supporters have congregated on game day, often just a few blocks apart.
The Mexican population staked out the Georges-Étienne-Cartier monument at the foot Mount Royal and cruised Parc Ave. in euphoria when they beat Germany. (Hirving Lozano's goal caused a mild earthquake at home).
Our tribal identities have long defined our soccer allegiances in Montreal. But come 2026 - eight years and two World Cups from now - we should have a team in the contest. Canada along with the United States and Mexico, just won a joint bid to host that tournament. Montreal will be the site of three games. And as a host nation, we should automatically qualify.
Canada is a far cry from Mexico or the U.S. when it comes to fielding a viable team. Our women have been the superior force in the last few years. So coach John Herdman has now moved over to the men's squad to whip them into shape.
Will Montrealers abandon their traditional allegiances to cheer for our own team in 2026, especially if they take to the pitch at the Big O? The World Cup could fill the off-season gap quite nicely in this hockey-obsessed town. Maybe we won't cancel school on game days, like they do in Uruguay, but there should be enough love of the beautiful game to one day become a unified soccer nation. ahanes@postmedia.com
CREDIT: ALLISON HANES;The Gazette

