Warning: Due to bad weather, this Saturday has been postponed.
All baseball games, soccer matches, family strolls and synagogue services are delayed until Sunday.
When I first heard Halloween was officially postponed in Montreal, I thought it was related to Bill 21 - and the fear some costumes might have non-Quebec values.
But it turned out we were just spooked by bad weather, the latest casualty of our growing paranoia about weather and all things.
Meanwhile, Laval and Ottawa faced down the same forecast and lived to tell the tale. What a Halloween horror! "Halloween-gate" has been a porthole into several aspects of 21st-century modern life.
Partly it's about weather sensationalism, as the spread of competing weather channels and apps makes forecasts more omnipresent and frightening (though they still seem wrong half the time).
Every second day brings an extreme thunderstorm alert, heavy rainfall warning, heat advisory or wind, smog or fog warning. Or the likelihood of a possibility of a chance of an extreme no-laundry-on-theclothesline alert.
The media gleefully pick up these forecast "possibilities" and hype them even more - and next thing you know we're all cancelling outdoor plans and sitting by our screens.
Halloween's forecast was typical overkill. There were overblown Wednesday news reports about biblical 70 mm rainstorms and 90 km/h winds expected over the "Halloween period."
Yet the actual forecast for trick-and-treat hours between 5:30-8:30 p.m. was just light wind and some 10 millimetres of rain. But City Hall got swept up in today's weather hysteria and reacted as if we were getting Hurricane Halloween.
So Halloween was postponed for rain, though we've all been out in blizzards where Frankenstein suits had to slide over snowsuits.
Our city's surrender to ordinary fall weather was slightly embarrassing. We've always had a rep as the party-hardy, weather-toughened town that scoffed at Toronto for bringing in the army during a routine snowstorm.
But this time we were the weather wimps.
Staid old Ottawa faced an almost identical forecast to ours, with five-degree-colder temperatures, but refused to blink even after Montreal did.
Their mayor announced: "I don't think rain is a reason to move Halloween."
Given our different response to Ontario's, is this a new distinct Quebec trait we can add to our province's new immigrant "values test"? What day is Halloween? A) Oct.
31; B) The day after Halloween; C) The first beautiful day after Halloween in November, or December ... or spring.
Why did Valérie Plante decide to trust a 24-hour-away forecast anyway? I never do, or I wouldn't step outside. Was there a City Hall Halloween Advisory Committee Of Weather Wizards who voted on the chances of violent rain? Whatever the reason, by 5 p.m.
Thursday afternoon, with only light rain falling, Mayor Plante was probably praying for Noah's flood.
Some children I know were terribly upset at the delay because "Halloween is today!" and kids think about now, not tomorrow. One friend fought a war with his daughter after bowing to the city's decision.
"She said we weren't really committed to Halloween, that we weren't willing to get soaked like her - and she was probably right."
The irony is Halloween is our scary holiday filled with ghosts, ghouls, skeletons, and mock graves - and the standard Hollywood backdrop is fierce lightning storms. The scarier the weather, the more thrilling.
Many families insisted on going out illicitly on the traditional night so there were two Halloweens: the scary one and the supposedly safe one. But that robbed magic from both.
Yet Halloween's postponement is also symbolic of another 21st century trend, as we try to make the world an ever-more protected place for our kids and us.
Most cities now build ultrasafe, often sterile playground swings, slides and other equipment, designed more by safety specialists than play experts. Few kids are allowed to play street hockey, or walk to school alone as over-protection trumps adventure.
But where does safety stop and paranoia begin? As climate change makes weather more extreme, will future Halloweens be delayed because they're too cold, too hot, too scary or too dark? If someone falls off a chair tomorrow while changing the clocks, will we ban the time change? Thank goodness St. Patrick's Day refuses to give in to its traditionally awful weather. In 1993, over 41 cm of snow fell but the parade went on, which still sets a good Montreal example.
Each new safety precaution we take makes some logical sense in itself, but added up they can create an over-protective, unadventurous world for our kids and us.
Yet Mother Nature doesn't play by logical rules. Ironically, by early Friday afternoon a severe wind warning was in effect with gusts threatening to go to 100 km/h. Over 100,000 Montreal households were out of power for our new, improved Nov. 1 Halloween.
But this time City Hall was wisely silent, a sign they'd learned something - and at least there wouldn't be three Halloweens. joshfreed49@gmail.com
CREDIT: JOSH FREED;The Gazette

