I was asked by a reader how climate change will affect the future of wine. Rather than just give my impressions, I went back to a recording I have of the Tasting Climate Change conference that was held here in Montreal back in October 2017.
Organized by Montreal sommelier Michelle Bouffard, the panel of experts presented a fascinating overview of the possible ramifications of our planet's warming climate. A second edition will be held here on Nov. 12, 2019.
What I took out of the conference is that there is some good, but mostly bad news. I, of course, use "good" with the understanding that the wide-scale implications of climate change will be catastrophic for our planet. However, at least in the short term, many of the coolest growing regions have benefitted from warmer temperatures.
Gregory Jones, a specialist in climate change and a vineyard owner in Oregon, said, "lots of wine is being produced at latitudes that 30 years ago we would never have dreamed."
We can see this all over the world, even here in Quebec where our local wine industry is not only thriving, but we are seeing a movement away from cold-climate hybrid grapes to classic vinifera varieties like chardonnay and the pinot family.
Jamie Goode, also a scientist and wine critic, mentioned places like Germany and his native England that have seen a marked increase in the quality of wines.
Jones has spent 30 years mapping average temperatures in the world's regions, which he refers to as "climate envelopes." Certain grapes, such as pinot noir, have a narrow climate niche that he said was an average temperature between 14-16 C.
While growing seasons that go above this envelope can produce good vintages, Jones believes pinot's tolerance for producing quality wine is limited to a two-degree rise in average temperatures.
Jones has more than 120 years of climate data on Oregon and 15 of the last 20 have been the warmest. If it continues, Oregon winemakers might need to change grape varieties.
Other grapes have a wider envelope but a warming climate can bring a host of other problems. Australia and South Africa are facing water shortages and heat waves, like Australia's record heat wave in January where temperatures didn't drop below 40 C for a week. Aside from an imbalanced ripening, wine cultivation puts even more stress onto water supply.
As cooler climate regions warm, they can be touched by new insects and diseases that previously couldn't survive the winters. Also, warmer winters, especially in warmer growing areas, mean the vines do not reach full dormancy, which causes stress and can affect the following year's harvest.
While we all appreciate an early spring, it can be dangerous for wine grapes. In many areas such as Burgundy and the Loire Valley, warm soil temperatures too early in the season have caused the vines to start their growing season earlier. So-called "global warming" pertains to average temperatures and that does not preclude late frosts, which have ravaged some areas over the past few years.
In short, there is a lot to worry about if you are a wine lover. Warmer growing areas are at risk of becoming too warm to produce quality wines. Cooler areas are at risk of more hail and disease. Those in the middle, well, they might have to replant their grape varieties as they transition from cool to a warm climate. gazettewine@gmail.com T\twitter.com/BillZacharkiw Facebook.com/billzacharkiwine
CREDIT: BILL ZACHARKIW;The Gazette

