After a gruelling week, it's break time for snow-clearing crews that have been dealing with a deluge of snow, ice and rain, as well as puddles, slush and ice caused by wild temperature fluctuations.
But the time off will be staggered over the weekend, meaning snow-clearing operations will continue across the city but at a slower pace, said city of Montreal spokesperson Philippe Sabourin.
"There are people who have been working since last Saturday under extreme circumstances, and they're reaching their 70 hours so we have to give them a break," Sabourin said, citing a provincial law regulating drivers of heavy vehicles.
"It's important because we reduce the risk of accidents when employees are well-rested and vigilant."
He said the operation can continue because workers - about half city employees and half private contractors - are on different shifts. And some workers were given breaks before they reached the 70-hour threshold.
Sabourin added: "It's important that this is not perceived as us stopping the operation because people have to continue to follow parking restrictions."
The city hopes to have hauled away all the snow by Tuesday.
He said it's difficult to estimate how much of the city has been cleared so far because in some cases, crews have to return to streets that have already been cleared to remove newer snow or to remove ice that has formed after brief thaws.
The city has had to deal with about 50 centimetres of snow.
On Sunday, 23 centimetres fell but due to windy conditions - snow drifted from roofs and balconies - many streets were covered with 35 centimetres, Sabourin said. Then, on Sunday, another 15 centimetres fell.
The city wants crews legally available to work next week because more snow is in the forecast, Sabourin said.
Earlier Friday, Montrealers awoke to an ice-encrusted city - and a warning about treacherous sidewalk and road conditions from Urgences-Santé.
"We are asking the population to delay any non-essential trips," the ambulance service warned via Twitter.
At 9:30 a.m., it was receiving 140 calls per hour, many of them about injuries from falls on ice. On a normal day, 70 calls per hour come in.
As of 11 a.m., Urgences-Santé had received 144 calls about falls on Friday. On average, it gets 70 to 80 such calls per day.
In addition to the slew of ice-related falls, ambulance workers were also stymied by icy stairs at non-weather-related calls, said Urgences-Santé operations chief Stéphane Smith.
"The calls took longer because it was hard to get around."
By 3 p.m., the situation was stabilizing, with Urgences-Santé fielding 80 to 90 calls per hour.
Mayor Valérie Plante acknowledged Montrealers had experienced a difficult week, as a weather cocktail that began with a sub-zero snowstorm Sunday transformed into a 15-cm snowfall Wednesday, followed by freezing rain Wednesday night and rain Thursday.
Plante said Friday that city crews are working very hard to clear streets and sidewalks.
Eight icebreakers are among the machines being used in snow-clearing operations.
"With ice removal, it's a particular situation; yesterday we couldn't put sand or abrasives or break the ice until we cleared the water," she said.
"But we have to remember, winter is our lot in life. It always has been. We're adapting, this (latest) meteorological cocktail has been exceptionally challenging. We haven't exactly been lucky."
The Société de transport de Montréal thanked commuters on Twitter Friday for their patience over the past few days.
The transit agency acknowledged that getting around was "often frustrating and exhausting."
Some people complained of overcrowded buses or buses not showing up at all during Friday morning's rush hour.
"Today, like cars, our buses were dealing with difficult driving conditions such as slippery roads, traffic and snow-clearing operations that caused a generalized slowdown in the network," said Amélie Regis, a spokesperson for the STM.
The STM was also dealing with reserved bus lanes that were not cleared on Sherbrooke St. W. used by the popular 105 bus route, as well as others. That resulted in delayed buses, many buses not showing up on time, and more congestion than normal on Sherbrooke.
Sophie Paquet, a spokesperson for the Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough where the bus lane is located, explained that crews removed snow from both sides of Sherbrooke on Monday and Tuesday, but the accumulation of snow on Wednesday was still lingering Friday because crews had to switch to spreading salt and abrasives in order to tackle slippery roads and sidewalks.
Paquet said crews will be back on snow-removal duty over the next few days, but the workforce will be reduced because many workers will be given a break.
"We will make all possible efforts to make sure that Sherbrooke is freed up by Monday morning," Paquet said. "But of course, we have no control of the weather in the coming days." Postmedia News
CREDIT: The Gazette

