For my 50th birthday last year, I planned a fun-filled trip for my family over spring break. My destination was Mexico - specifically Tulum, with its great restaurants, unbeatable beaches, cool vibes and even cooler margaritas.
I soaked up every sunny second of that trip, discovered mescal, had some terrific tacos and even got a tan.
The only downside was discovering that my two teenage kids had hit that age where they were too old to spend the day on the beach making sandcastles and too young to partake in the nightlife. And while I was happiest doing absolutely nothing, those pesky kids kept wanting to do things.
"Next year," I thought, climbing down into yet another cenote, "those sulky teenagers will choose the vacation spot." And because I held a grudge about them shunning my Mexican getaway, this year I halved the budget for the annual family vacay. "No problem," they said, "we want to go to New York."
"New York ... New York ...," I thought, with Sinatra's iconic performance invading my subconscious.
I couldn't think up a single reason not to go. We could drive there, I could find a bargain hotel, we could check out some great restaurants, maybe cough up for a Broadway show or two, and window-shop, museum-hop and people-watch in what is probably my favourite city on Earth.
"OK, kids," I said, "let's start planning!" New York is a great road-trip destination; when you think about it, it's about as far away as Toronto - and who wants to vacation in Toronto? Though I have no problem driving seven hours to places like Métis-sur-Mer in the Lower St. Lawrence, I always thought New York City would be a frightening drive. But it was about six hours for us (the border crossings were close to deserted). Around four hours into the trip to Manhattan, you'll reach Saratoga Springs, which happens to have one of the best bakeries in North America, Mrs. London's Boutique Bakery (464 Broadway; mrslondonsbakery. com). It's ideal for lunch, or to pick up sandwiches to go.
Coming into New York is easier by day: things can get a bit tricky around the New Jersey Turnpike. Once you arrive, I'd recommend driving directly to the nearest parking lot, since taxis and the subway are the smartest modes of transport in and around Manhattan.
Expect to pay about US$50 a night for parking, but think of what you'll save on flights.
Of course, there's always the train, but the 11-hour Amtrak trip from Montreal is the definition of tedious. As for the bus, count on a good nine-hour trip. Flights are under an hour, but a round trip costs around $300. So driving is pretty hard to beat.
Budget Airbnb listings in New York are surprisingly scant, unless you're up for lodging far from downtown. We stayed at the centrally located Gregory hotel, where I managed to get a good deal.
As for what we did: walking, eating and Broadway shows. Here are some highlights: BROADWAY Of course, the entertainment options in New York City are endless, but with kids, a Broadway musical is a natural choice.
You'll pay a heavy price to see one, but there are ways to soften the blow.
We saw Hamilton, Come From Away and The Book of Mormon. Hamilton opened in 2015 and is still the hottest ticket on Broadway, but I managed to buy tickets for half price on the day of a blizzard. Lucky me, but no matter what the price, I highly recommend this musical. My kids called it life-changing, and I agree.
Come From Away is equally tremendous, telling the story of the people in Gander, N.L., tending to passengers of the 38 planes that were diverted to their town on 9/11. Canadians will especially enjoy this heartwarming show.
The Book of Mormon was cowritten by South Park creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone, so don't expect political correctness.
The hilarious musical tells the story of two young Mormon missionaries in Africa. Not necessarily recommended for younger kids or, of course, Mormons.
You can go through the regular online rigmarole to purchase tickets, but you'll pay full price, which often comes in at around $200 per ticket. Ouch. Unless you want to be certain to see a specific show or sit with your friends or family, I'd throw caution to the wind and head to the TKTS discount booths, at Times Square and three other locations. Tickets are up to 50 per cent off there, but keep in mind these are same-day tickets only, and if you show up in the morning, only matinees will be listed. Lineups can be long at peak tourist times, but I had short waits. Even if you don't get tickets to the show you want, the alternatives can be pretty good.
MUSEUM The Tenement Museum (103 Orchard St.; tenement.org): Art aficionados will make a beeline for the majestic Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Guggenheim, MOMA (the Museum of Modern Art) or, for American art, the Whitney Museum. And that's just for starters. But with kids in tow, I chose the Tenement Museum on the Lower East Side. Focused on New York's immigrant history, it hosts walking tours featuring stories about the architects, artists and everyday people who shaped the neighbourhood, as well as the realities of tenement life on the Lower East Side in the early 20th century. Be sure to book tours ahead of time.
FOOD There are countless options for food lovers in New York, ranging from the top pick on the 2017 World's 50 Best Restaurants list, Eleven Madison Park (elevenmadisonpark.com) to the exquisitely French Le Coucou (lecoucou.com) and über-cool newcomer Frenchette (frenchettenyc.com) to arguably the world's best hotdog joint, Gray's Papaya (grayspapayanyc.com). When visiting with the family, though, my Michelin-star dining aspirations go out the window in favour of good times, great people-watching and even better food. When travelling, I prefer a light breakfast in favour of lunch, but brunch is a big deal in New York - and a good deal, too, at hipper restaurants like Momofuku Ssäm Bar (ssambar.momofuku.com) and the sophisticated and very foodie Estela (estelanyc. com). Ivan Ramen (25 Clinton St.; ivanramen.com): Ivan Orkin is known to many for his Chef's Table episode on Netflix (a favourite of my 13-year-old) and his terrific Ivan Ramen cookbook (Ten Speed Press, 2013). His restaurant is young and fun, and offers a diverse selection of ramen bowls. Favourites include the classic shio ramen and shoyu ramen, as well as specials like the triple pork ramen with pork belly two ways and whole wheat noodles. There's a superb selection of craft beers, and delicious appetizers like miso-roasted cauliflower and Japanese fried chicken with toasted garlic caramel and ranch sauce. This is the ideal spot for discovering new flavours while soaking up the cool ambience along with those great rye noodles. Atla (372 Lafayette St.; atlanyc. com): Located in NoHo, this is the casual New York restaurant of Enrique Olvera, the chef behind Pujol in Mexico City and Cosme in New York. Atla's cuisine is creative Mexican, and be warned: a meal here doesn't come cheap. But with such amazing cooking and such terrific ingredients, why should it? I licked every plate clean, as did my kids, who relished everything from the herbed guacamole to the Brussels sprouts tacos, along with the Milanese-style fish, prawns with serrano chili pepper aioli, yellowtail tiradito and fried pork belly with salsa verde. The churros and margaritas were the best I've tasted. This is Mexican cooking of the highest order. Next time, I'll go for the popular breakfast menu. Le Coq Rico (30 East 20th St.; lecoqriconyc.com): This very French restaurant is owned by famous chef Antoine Westermann and specializes in chicken. When I say chicken, I mean specific breeds, like Brune Landaise, Plymouth Rock and Jersey Giant. There's also guinea hen, duck, squab and all sorts of dishes made with eggs and offal including chicken livers and foie gras. Le Coq Rico is quite posh, but what drew me here was the chance to taste such fabulous birds and share, which is ideal for family dining. Other standouts include the spectacular fries, duck rillettes, fabulous desserts like the millefeuille and île flottante, as well as the cocktails. The roast chicken is delectable, and the service is beyond reproach. Chic, but in no way pretentious.
Don Antonio (309 West 50th St.; donantoniopizza.com): New York is a serious pizza city, and the offerings are endless. (Some of the best are across the bridge in Brooklyn.) Located in the theatre district just a few blocks from Times Square, Don Antonio makes one of the best Neapolitan pies in New York. There are dozens of options, be they traditional or creative, all prepared with homemade mozzarella and baked in a wood-fired oven. The wine list is pricey and the service can be brusque (they don't take reservations), but the pizza is superb and the location is ideal for a pre-show meal. Katz's Delicatessen (205 East Houston St.; katzsdelicatessen.com): Located a few blocks from the Tenement Museum, New York's most famous deli is a must-visit for Montrealers, if only to taste the difference between their pastrami and our smoked meat. Frankly, I prefer our spicier smoked meat, but the ambience at Katz's is hard to top, in an expansive space filled with locals feasting on meat-heaving sandwiches and half-sour pickles. A word of warning: you'll pay US$21 per sandwich, compared to $9.95 at Schwartz, but one can easily feed two. Movie buffs should look for the spot from the famous "I'll have what she's having" scene in When Harry Met Sally ..., in the middle of the room. Russ & Daughters (179 East Houston St.; russanddaughters. com): For just over a century, this institution has been owned and operated by four generations of the Russ family, and I can think of few food experiences that say "New York" quite like it. The shop may be small, but the offerings are huge. The smoked and cured fish is stacked high, the shelves are heaving with chocolate and cinnamon babka, and the raspberry rugelach is lined up next to New York's signature black-and-white cookies. There is pickled herring, caviar, halvah, chopped liver, latkes and gefilte fish galore. If you want to sit down to enjoy all this fabulous Jewish fare, head to the Russ & Daughters Café just a few blocks away (127 Orchard St.) or the Russ & Daughters restaurant and takeout counter at the Jewish Museum (1109 5th Ave.), where dishes are listed under "noshes," "boards" or "platters." Expect to line up for a seat during peak hours, but it's definitely worth the wait. (Cool fact: Montreal's Arthurs restaurant was inspired by Russ & Daughters.) Dominique Ansel (189 Spring St.; dominiqueansel.com): This SoHo bakery was the first shop in the empire of French pâtissier Dominique Ansel, inventor of the cronut, that pastry-sensation cross between a doughnut and a croissant. Lineups can snake down the street, and the small bakery is crowded, but there were no lines when I visited. The main draw is the cronut (flavours change often), which is worth a taste but is definitely on the sweet side. Ansel is famous for other creations, too, like his frozen s'mores and his latest, the kiwi sorbet bar. It's all a lot of fun, especially for kids. Too bad the service staff isn't friendlier. Magnolia Bakery (multiple locations; magnoliabakery.com):
Another New York institution, Magnolia started cupcake mania in the U.S., which was further boosted by the Sex and the City fans who lined up to devour Carrie Bradshaw's favoured indulgence. I ended up in front of the Magnolia at Rockefeller Center and thought, "Why not?" A big hit with the kids, the cupcakes are small, super sweet and absolutely scrumptious. Buy a few (vanilla and red velvet are faves), cross the street and take a break while admiring the skyscrapers. The City Bakery (3 West 18th St.; thecitybakery.com): Opened in 1990 by pastry chef and former TV producer/director Maury Rubin, City Bakery became famous for its modern take on classic French pastries. Rubin is known for his simple-chic tarts, pretzel croissants and fantastic hot chocolate. This is a great spot to unwind and indulge, and at lunchtime the buffet is filled with healthy soups, sandwiches and salads. Friendly staff and seriously delicious goods make this a top pick, especially for those looking for takeout, perhaps to enjoy in one of New York's many beautiful parks.
Lesley Chesterman's restaurant reviews return next week.
CREDIT: LESLEY CHESTERMAN;The Gazette



