A plan to extract magnesium - from the mountains of asbestos-laden mining residues in the Eastern Townships - is being hailed as a modern-day miracle, with governments already investing more than $40 million in public funds into one company's project.
But miracles involving asbestos have turned into public health catastrophes in the past, and so public health authorities once again are pleading for caution.
More than 130 years of open-pit mining in Quebec's asbestos regions has left behind an estimated 800 million tonnes of residue; sandy debris piled into grey mounds and mountains in and around former mining towns such as Asbestos and Thetford Mines.
A Quebec-based company called Alliance Magnesium Inc. (AMI) claims it has developed a groundbreaking technology to transform those mountains into two valuable materials: magnesium, a lightweight metal, and amorphous silica, which can be used to strengthen concrete. The process also destroys forever the deadly asbestos fibres contained in the debris.
The project will be a major economic boon for the Eastern Townships and a triple win for the environment, AMI president and founder Joël Fournier says.
"We are green, green, green," Fournier told the Montreal Gazette in a recent interview. "We are green because we are remediating a mine site, the process is green because we use hydroelectricity, and we produce a metal that reduces greenhouse gas emissions."
That metal, magnesium, is 33 per cent lighter than aluminum and 70 per cent lighter than steel, so carmakers, for example, are keen to get their hands on it as they face strict new fuel efficiency targets. Magnesium currently sells for about US$4,000 a tonne.
Fournier says his company already has buyers for the 12,000 tonnes of magnesium ingots it hopes to produce annually over the next five years, when his commercial plant is up and running.
At its technical demonstration plant on the site of the former Noranda magnesium smelter in Danville, AMI already has been producing about two ingots of magnesium a day for the past year. AMI owns and plans to use about 100,000 tonnes of asbestos tailings from the defunct Jeffrey Mine in neighbouring Asbestos.
Before AMI can begin commercial operations, an environmental certificate from Quebec's environment ministry will be required and the project eventually might be subjected to public hearings by the province's environmental watchdog, the BAPE, a spokesperson for Quebec Environment Minister MarieChantal Chassé told the Gazette.
But both the federal and provincial governments have already invested heavily. Quebec has provided a $17.5-million loan and has taken out an equity interest of $13.4 million, while the federal government announced a $12-million investment this fall through Sustainable Development Technology Canada.
The plant is projected to employ about 70 workers in its first commercial phase starting in 2020, and if all goes according to plan, production will ramp up to 50,000 tonnes a year by 2022 or 2023, employing about 350 workers.
Fournier, who holds a PhD in electrochemistry from Université de Sherbrooke and a post-doctoral degree from the INRS Energy and Materials Institute, developed the magnesium extraction process, which he describes as virtually waste-free.
"We take the mining residue, which is like a sand ... with a backhoe and we bring it to our plant, which is very close to the deposit (tailings), maybe 200 metres away. We put the sand in acid, which dissolves the magnesium to make magnesium chloride. The asbestos fibres are also dissolved, losing their structure."
The magnesium chloride is then dried into a salt, which is introduced into an electrolytic cell, from which liquid magnesium is produced. This hot liquid is then moulded into ingots.
What remains, Fournier said, is mostly amorphous silica, a sandlike material that can be sold to concrete makers to produce a stronger concrete. The only other leftovers from the process are iron oxide and cobalt, and the company is researching uses for these.
"We are experimenting and it seems to be very promising," he said. "We can expect that maybe in 50 years from now, or 100, these (asbestos) deposits will have disappeared completely. That's wonderful and after that we will be able to plant trees and create a forest. Why not? It's the best way to do it. Transform a liability into an asset."
Asbestos, once touted as a miracle fibre because of its strength and fire-resistance, was the economic lifeblood of Quebec's asbestos regions for decades, until the world slowly came to accept scientific findings that breathing asbestos fibres causes fatal diseases such as asbestosis, mesothelioma and lung cancer.
Last fall, Canada finally joined the ranks of more than 50 countries that have banned asbestos. Federal regulations banning the import, sale and use of asbestos and products containing asbestos came into effect on Dec. 30.
But AMI and a handful of other companies active in the former mining region, managed to persuade the federal government to exempt the use of mining residues from those regulations.
In granting the exemption, the government ignored objections from non-governmental and labour organizations, as well as a formal notice of objection signed by the regional directors of all 18 public health regions of Quebec.
"These residues can contain up to 40 per cent asbestos fibres," the position paper by the public health leaders said. "The federal regulation that aims to protect the Canadian population against the health effects that asbestos can cause cannot ignore the important source of contamination that mining residues constitute."
They wanted the government to use its new regulations to make it illegal to increase the level of asbestos fibres above current levels in ambient air. They also wanted the law to require proper barricades around the tailings to limit public access, and to create a board of review to manage the risks associated with the use of mining residues.
The government chose to do none of the above.
"I am ... satisfied that these proposed regulations, along with existing provincial controls, will address the health risks associated with asbestos mining residues," federal Environment Minister Catherine McKenna wrote in a letter to the public health directors.
While workers are required to wear protective gear as soon as any level of asbestos is detected on a work site, the public is unprotected, said Dr. Philippe Lessard, regional director of public health for the Chaudière-Appalaches region.
"The risk I see ... is that as soon as we start to manipulate and disturb these residues, we are sending these (asbestos) fibres into the air, and they will circulate with the wind and settle everywhere, near the homes and the population," Lessard told the Gazette.
Studies already have shown that ambient levels of asbestos fibres are higher in communities that have asbestos tailings than elsewhere, he said, and that asbestos-related disease is more prevalent.
He wants the government to hold public hearings on the magnesium projects, where public health officials can explain the dangers, so that people can make informed decisions.
But AMI's Fournier said his company has been perfectly open and transparent, answering questions from the public at two recent meetings organized by the town of Asbestos and attended by about 200 people.
He also said the asbestos residues contain only about one per cent "free asbestos fibres." not up to 40 per cent asbestos as the public health position paper states.
"People who said that are insulting the intelligence of people who extracted asbestos. They didn't leave behind 40 per cent asbestos. They were not idiots. They didn't even have that much in the mother rock. It's impossible."
He added that his company is monitoring ambient air, and will co-operate with any remedial measures the government approval process requires. mlalonde@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MICHELLE LALONDE;The Gazette

