Riding the wave of Mexican cuisine's new-found popularity, chef Carlos Flores and Edgar Banos, of the Montreal restaurant Emiliano's, aim to do things differently.
"Mexican cuisine can mean everything from street food to highend restaurants," says Flores, "but what we want to emphasize are quality ingredients."
And so they do, making tacos not only with fried fish or the traditional pulled pork (carnitas), but also with local lobster, duck and lamb, topped not only with the classic salsa but innovative condiments like cherry and serrano pepper marmalade.
Inquiring about their menu plans for Cinco de Mayo on May 5, they laugh a bit. "It has become such a Mexican restaurant cliché," Flores says. Adds Banos: "It's a celebration, but it's not Mexican independence day, which is what a lot of people believe."
It marks Mexico's victory over the French army at the Battle of Puebla in 1862. "It's not like we won a war or anything. We just won one battle," Banos says. "And we were defeated the next day."
The dish most associated with the Puebla region is mole, the spiced chili sauce famous for including chocolate served over chicken, pork, turkey or eggs. Mole would be ideal, but recipes are lengthy. So here are some alternatives:
MANGO MARGARITA
Serves:
1 For the spiced sugar syrup:
1 cup (500 mL) water
1 cup (250 mL) granulated sugar pinch cloves
1/4 tsp cinnamon
1. Bring water and sugar to a boil. Add cloves, cinnamon, stir, remove from heat, and let cool.
2. Keep refrigerated
3. In a shaker with ice combine:
1 1/2 oz (45 mL) white tequila
1/2 oz (15 mL) lemon juice
1/2 oz (15 mL) spiced sugar syrup
1/2 oz (15 mL) mango purée
4. Shake over ice and pour into an old-fashioned glass filled with ice. Garnish with a slice of lime.
MESCAL MOJITO
This drink could be made with tequila, but it takes on a new dimension when made with mescal. Banos says, "the smokier the mescal, the better."
Serves: 1
1 1/2 oz (45 mL) mescal
1/2 oz (15 mL) fresh lime juice
5 mint leaves
1/4 lime wedge, sliced in half
Pomegranate juice
Sparkling water
1. Muddle the mescal, lime juice, mint and lime wedge together in a glass. Fill the glass with ice.
2. Pour over enough pomegranate juice to fill one quarter of the glass. Top with sparkling water.
3. Stir well and garnish with a slice of lemon and a mint sprig.
DUCK TACOS WITH APPLE POBLANO CHUTNEY
Chef Carlos Flores makes this unusual taco with duck breast, but you could also try it with lamb or even braised pork shoulder. This recipe consists of three preparations and then a final assembly of the taco plates. The chutney and salsa can be made a few hours in advance.
Serves: 4 (12 tacos)
1. Duck breasts
3 Pekin duck breasts, about 225 g (8 oz) each
Sea salt and pepper
1. Prepare the duck breasts: With a sharp knife, score the skin of the duck breasts in a criss-cross pattern without cutting too deeply into the fat, season with salt and pepper, then place in a dry, thick-bottomed pan, skin side down, and fry on medium heat (without touching) for 10 minutes. Turn the duck breasts over and cook for another 5 minutes. Remove the duck breasts from the pan, and place on a plate, skin-side up. Cover with aluminum foil and let rest for at least 5 minutes before slicing.
2. Pico de gallo (salsa)
2 medium sized tomatoes, seeded and diced
1/2 small white onion, diced
2 tbsp (30 mL) chopped cilantro
1 tsp (5 mL) minced jalapeno pepper
1 tbsp (15 mL) lime
1 tbsp (15 mL) olive oil
Sea salt to taste
1. In a small bowl, combine all the ingredients and taste to adjust seasonings.
3. Apple and Poblano pepper chutney
1 large red cooking apple, such as Cortland, peeled, seeded and diced
1/2 cup (125 mL) sugar
1/2 cup (125 mL) water
1/2 poblano pepper, seeded, deveined, and diced
1 1/2 tbsp (375 mL) sherry vinegar
Pinch of salt
2. Place the apple, sugar and water in a small pot over medium-low heat, and stir until the sugar dissolves. Add the pepper, bring to a simmer, and cook until the apple is tender yet still holds its shape. When the sauce is thick and glossy, add the sherry vinegar, stir well and remove from heat. Add salt to taste and set aside to cool to room temperature.
4. Tacos and plate assembly
1 1/2 cups grated Cotija cheese (or substitute with Feta)
12 fresh corn tortillas, 6 inches (15 cm) in diameter
Chives to garnish
1. To assemble the plates: Warm the tortillas on a lightly oiled grill pan over medium-high heat to warm through (you want a few grill marks on them), then line up three on each plate.
2. Slice the duck breast into as thin slices as possible, and distribute the slices evenly in the middle of each taco. Top the duck slices with a small spoonful of chutney, followed by a spoonful of salsa. Sprinkle the cheese evenly over the top as well as a few chives to garnish. Serve immediately.
GUACAMOLE WITH CRAB AND ROASTED PINEAPPLE
Guacamole is a must at any Mexican feast. This one's dressed up with Canadian crabmeat and pineapple, which adds a lovely sweetness to this unctuous dip.
Serves: 4
1/2 cup (125 mL) diced golden pineapple
1 tbsp (15 mL) olive oil Sea salt and pepper
3 large avocados
1/2 small white oniosn
2 Italian tomatoes, seeded and diced
1/2 bunch cilantro leaves, chopped fine
2 to 3 limes (depending on size)
1/3 cup (80 mL) mayonnaise, homemade or store-bought
1/4 jalapeno pepper
1 1/2 cups (375 mL) snow crabmeat
Tortilla chips (preferably unsalted) to serve
1. Preheat oven to 400 F (205 C). Place the pineapple on a baking sheet on parchment paper, toss with olive oil and a pinch of salt and pepper, and roast for 10 minutes. Remove from the oven and let cool to room temperature.
2. Prepare the guacamole: Halve the avocados, remove the pit and slice the flesh into large cubes. Place the cubes in a bowl, and lightly mash about one third with a fork. Stir in the onion, tomato and juice of one lime (or two small limes). Season with salt and pepper and a bit more lime juice if needed. Set aside.
3. With a blender or hand blender, blend together the mayonnaise, jalapeno and juice of remaining lime until smooth, then gently fold it into the crabmeat, followed by the roasted pineapple and any accumulated juices on the paper. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
4. Divide the guacamole over four plates and top with the crab mixture. Stick some chips into the guacamole and serve, with extra chips alongside.
CREDIT: LESLEY CHESTERMAN;The Gazette

