The average Montreal homeowner will see their property taxes rise by $77 in 2015, and overall expenditures by the city will drop - for the first time since the megacity was created in 2002 - under the first budget created by the relatively new administration of Mayor Denis Coderre.
Residential taxes will increase on average by 2.2 per cent a year, with boroughs like Plateau-Mont-Royal (4.5 per cent), the Sud-Ouest (4 per cent), LaSalle and St-Laurent (2.9 per cent), Outremont (2.8 per cent) and Cote-des-Neiges- Notre-Dame-de-Grace (2.7 per cent) seeing the biggest hikes. The Conference Board of Canada has estimated the national inflation rate at 2.0 per cent.
A $418,000 home saddled with a 2.2 per cent property tax hike will see taxes raise by $77. Last year's average tax increase was 2.8 per cent.
Taxes on non-residential properties will rise by an average of 2.1 per cent.
Wednesday's budget presentation was punctuated by the horns and whistles and jostling of hundreds of angry municipal workers protesting against looming changes to their pension plans who started converging at 7 a.m. At one point, they prevented city councillors, escorted by a phalanx of roughly 20 police officers, from entering city hall for five minutes.
Coderre presented a relatively austere operating budget of $4.88 billion, $12.8 million less than last year's offering, representing a cut of 0.3 per cent. For the eight years before 2013, Montreal budgets rose an average of 3.7 per cent annually.
A large part of the city's savings will come through an estimated $103 million in reductions in payments into municipal pension plans, in part because of improved market performances (accounting for savings of $53 million), and because of changes under the Quebec government's proposed Bill 3 legislation that are expected to save Montreal $49 million a year. Proposed by the Liberal government and supported by provincial opposition parties, Bill 3 is expected to pass into law before the end of the year.
Expenditures on services like snow clearing, garbage collection, roadwork and water management will increase only slightly from last year.
"We were able to control expenses without cutting into the services to citizens," Coderre said. "Thanks to efficient financial planning, we were able to reduce our expenses while maintaining our main priorities, in particular public transit and the renovation of our infrastructure."
The Societe de transport de Montreal will receive an increase of $25 million a year from the city, to a total of $409 million. Opposition party Projet Montreal, however, accused the city of "creative accounting" saying the city was combining two payments to the STM made each year into one at budget time to inflate its worth.
The STM will announce Thursday it is raising fare prices in the new year. Monthly passes will rise from $79.50 to $82. A single fare is going up to $3.25 from $3.
The budget won approval from an unexpected camp in Richard Bergeron, the former leader of Projet Montreal who stepped down this month after 10 years at its helm so he could take a spot on the city's executive committee.
"If I had won the last election, it's exactly what I would have done," Bergeron said during a debate on the budget in city council. It is imperative for a city to cut expenses so it can invest in developing the city, he said. "Montreal is seeing a development boom that is has not seen since the 1980s, 30 years ago."
His former party was less effusive. Although it conceded the administration had done a good job of restraining expenditures, Projet Montreal said most of the savings came through a provincial construct - Bill 3 - and the cutting of staff, which could come back to bite the city through a lack of proper inspections on construction projects, and lesser services.
"Since the arrival of M. Coderre, Montreal has lost 35,800 permanent jobs," interim leader Luc Ferrandez said. "We lost 22,000 people again to the suburbs. We have a problem of traffic congestion linked to its several construction sites, but without alternative solutions in public transit.
"Montreal is doing very badly, and in this budget, M. Coderre has not brought solutions to any of these problems." More innovative solutions, like using less expensive employees than police officers to issue traffic tickets, and cracking down on employee absenteeism should be initiated, Ferrandez said.
Cost savings came through reducing the city's workforce, numbering 22,423 employees in 2013, by the equivalent of 410 full-time employees in 2015, mostly through attrition, saving $33 million. The city plans to cut 2,200 jobs over five years. Cuts in pension plan payments represented another major chunk.
To help pay for infrastructure repairs, the city is increasing its borrowing. And 16.6 per cent of the city's overall expenses ($810 million) go to covering servicing its debt payments, the highest rate allowed under Quebec law, and one that threatens the city's long-term financial stability, Projet Montreal warned.
rbruemmer@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/renebruemmer
Highlights From Tuesday's Budget
Snow removal: $155.7 million, up $4.5 million from 2014
Repair and upkeep of water and sewage systems: $377 million, up from $373 million last year
Garbage collection: $163 million, same as last year
Roadwork: $136 million for municipal roadwork, up $6 million from last year, including $4.2 million for the Operation Pothole/Crack repair operating budget
Police and fire department budgets rise slightly, to $687 million and $360 million respectively
STM: $409 million, up $25 million from 2014
Urban forest: $6.4 million for tree planting and Emerald Ash Borer management, up $5.1 million over last year, plus another $7 million coming from capital works budget
Salaries compose $2.4 billion, or 49.2 per cent of 2015 municipal budget, a drop of 3.9 per cent
Debt: Long-term debt payments eat up 16.6 per cent up the total budget - $809.6 million
Pension plan payments: $495 million, representing 10 per cent of the total budget a 17% decrease over last year
Municipal salaries compose $2.4 billion, or 49.2 per cent of municipal budget
Credit: RENE BRUEMMER; The Gazette
Illustration MONTREAL GAZETTE / Source: City of Montreal; JEANINE LEE MONTREAL GAZETTE / Source: City of Montreal

