Montreal is moving ahead with a plan to build a new downtown park.
The location - a parking lot in the Quartier des Spectacles - had been promised to the McCord Museum, which is looking to build a new $150-million home.
Mayor Valérie Plante's administration decided to build a park there instead to make up for the loss of nearby Jardin Domtar, a green space that Domtar has sold to Groupe Canvar, which plans to build a condo/hotel tower there.
The new park will go on land bounded by de Maisonneuve Blvd., President-Kennedy Ave., and Bleury and Jeanne-Mance Sts.
On Friday, Plante announced the city has asked the Montreal Urban Ecology Centre to develop planning guidelines for the new park by consulting downtown residents and other stakeholders.
Consultations are expected to start this summer and be completed by year-end.
The city wants to increase green space downtown "to offer residents, workers and visitors a new place to relax in the heart of the Quartier des Spectacles," Plante said in a press release.
"We are committed to making Montreal a greener city. With this new space, we will continue the fight against heat islands." HEAT-ISLAND EFFECT The heat-island effect occurs when large concrete or paved areas absorb heat, increasing the temperature in the surrounding area.
"With the revegetation envisioned, the frequency, duration and intensity of extreme heat waves affecting urban health can be reduced," Plante said.
Plante said Domtar and Canvar "have committed to contribute financially" to create the new park.
A city spokesperson did not respond to a request for information about the timing of the park's opening and the amount the two companies are expected to donate.
As recently as late May, the Mc-Cord was still holding out hope that it could convince the city to let it use the parking lot, offering to create green space in and around a new building at the site.
Montreal initially told the Mc-Cord that no other city land was available for the McCord's planned new home. But in May the city told the museum that it would look for other city properties that meet the museum's criteria.
The McCord - a social history museum that welcomes 200,000 visitors annually - says it has run out of space at its current location on Sherbrooke St., across from Mc-Gill University. ariga@postmedia.com twitter.com/andyriga
CREDIT: ANDY RIGA;The Gazette

