The clip-clopping of horses slowly meandering through the windy streets of Old Montreal are soon to be a thing of the past.
Calèche drivers lost a last-ditch legal bid Friday to save their industry against a ban that comes into force on Jan. 1, but they have vowed to continue the fight.
"I'm very disappointed," said Luc Desparois, the owner of Services des calèches et traineau Lucky Luc. Desparois told a huddled mass of reporters at the courthouse he still intends to challenge the city's bylaw. "We'll keep fighting. They are taking away our livelihood."
Desparois filed the request for a temporary injunction this week, asking the court to temporarily suspend the city's bylaw ending the practice until a judge can rule on whether it is legal. Desparois said he waited just before the ban was enacted because he was concerned the city would make his life more difficult.
"And as soon as I said I was going to challenge the law, I got two tickets in the mail from the city; two tickets means I lose a permit for a year, and I have to pay for a lawyer and go to court."
Desparois's lawyer, Audi Gozlan, pleaded for the injunction, saying the situation was urgent. He argued the December holiday period is a crucial revenue period for owners of horse-drawn carriages, because there are many tourists in town. Gozlan also argued the city has no authority to abolish the horse-drawn carriage industry because that is under provincial jurisdiction.
He had hoped a judge would grant a temporary injunction as an emergency measure so that the calèches could continue operating through the new year. However, in the end, the judge agreed with the city's lawyer, who argued that there is no urgency in this case, because the owners had knowledge of the bylaw 16 months ago.
"They're coming here at one minute to midnight and arguing it's an emergency," lawyer Mélissandre Asselin-Blain argued. "But this is an emergency of their own making."
Gozlan said he still intends to challenge the legality of the law, and hopes to argue on the merits of the case in the next few weeks.
"The judge has not (ruled on the merits of the case) yet, but he simply said it's not urgent to decide this question," he said. "It will be decided later on. Hopefully, in a week or two, we'll be back in court to go over this question."
When Valérie Plante was elected in 2017, one of her campaign pledges was to put an end to the industry.
Incidents like horses collapsing in extreme heat have demonstrated that the calèche industry is inhumane, city councillor and deputy mayor Sterling Downey said this week.
"With heat waves in the summer, with climate change, with extreme colds in the winter, with construction on the roads, with the amount of vehicles that are on the road, we have a serious question on the animals'safety," he said.
Gozlan has argued the horses are well treated, and the decision of the city to put an end to the industry will mean a loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars for Desparois and other calèche owners.
Because the permits were only issued once by the city, they have a high resale value, with some people spending up to $200,000 for the permits. There are a little more than 20 permits in force in the city of Montreal, and about 50 horse drivers are operating under those permits. Those permits all expire on Jan. 1. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder Facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

