I can still remember the first time I noticed people getting seriously excited about pizza in Montreal. In was in 2006, and the pizzeria was Bottega. I recall master baker James McGuire telling me that he had been helping the owners, Fabrizio and Massimo Covone, develop a pizza dough. Then came word that the dome-shaped, woodburning oven would be shipped over, brick by brick, from Italy. The pizza wouldn't be the standard oldschool Montreal pie, tough-crusted, heavy on the toppings, usually all-dressed and sometimes even with the cheese beneath - rather than above - the works. When I finally tasted it I thought to myself, "Wow, minimalist." And compared to that old-school Amelio's, Pendeli's or Tasty Food, it was.
The authentic Neapolitan pizza has a soft and puffy crust with burnt blisters around the edge, a bit like Indian nan bread. The pizza cooks at ultra high temperatures (about 750-degrees F) for less than two minutes (90 seconds is ideal). When properly crafted, a Neapolitan pizza can be folded in four and eaten with your hands. At Toronto's Torroni pizzerias, the pizzaioles will not slice the pie in advance because a proper pizza is meant to be folded. (I gotta give it to Toronto, they may not have much of a hockey team but do they ever have superb pizza). As for toppings, less is more - or this pillowy pie becomes soggy. Round of dough, a smear of tomato sauce, a few slices of mozzarelle di bufala, couple basil leaves, blast together under blistering heat, and now we're talking pizza.
Bottega was a resounding success (still is) and suddenly a new wave of young restaurateurs started thinking that on the competitive Montreal restaurant scene, Neapolitan-style pizza was looking like the next big thing. Soon enough, a bunch of excellent pizzerias popped up around the city. There was Vinizza (sadly defunct), Magpie, Geppetto, and Bevo. More recently I've enjoyed the fabulous pizzas at Industria, Pizza n[degrees] 900, and those Impasto boys' pizzeria, Gema. And there are others on the horizon. The most recent pizzeria du moment is Pizzeria Nolana.
Created and operated by Gian Paolo De Riggi and his father, Agostino De Riggi, in partnership with restaurateur Jorge da Silva of the Mtl Cuisine group, Nolana is in the former long and narrow locale (a former lunch counter) of restaurant Racines, which closed last August after only nine months. I wasn't wild about Racines' cuisine, but I loved the decor, created by none other than new partner Agostino De Riggi, who is also responsible for the look of all Mtl Cuisine group's restaurants. De Riggi has refreshed the space making the most of the towering teal ceilings hung with Lambert et Fils Studio chandeliers, antiqued mirrors, bare bones wooden furniture and that fabulous line of tall windows facing the street. There's a bar at the end of the room that includes an open kitchen, and behind that is a Neapolitan-style wood burning pizza oven. The ambience is buzzy and fun, with semi-loud background tunes and diners young and old. Our waiter was a champ, who knew his menu well and despite the crowds, never kept us waiting.
The menu includes sfizi (smallplate appetizers), freddi (salads), salumi (charcuterie), a long list of pizzas as well as stuffed focaccia, a few pastas and as many desserts. The wine list is excellent, with a large number of primarily Italian, privately imported bottles under $60, as well as a few tourist-friendly Canadian selections. Prices are reasonable, but the restaurant is quite chic, making it a good choice for a first date or a family dinner.
We began with a selection of sfizi: eggplant involtini, a frittatine di pasta, panino rustico, and the requisite polpetta di care, a.k.a. meatball. I liked the eggplant, sliced then grilled and rolled round some burrata and set in a puddle of tomato sauce. Classic and perfectly scarfable. The frittatine turned out to be a chunk of fried spaghetti served with a cheesy white sauce and red peppers. Tasted a bit like leftovers, but that sure didn't stop me. The panino was a rolled pasta, filled
with rapini, pancetta mozzarella and sausage. Good, but nothing exciting. The meatball was the best of the lot. Light in texture, perfectly seasoned and served with a vibrant tomato sauce, that meatball was textbook.
Before we launched into the mains, I ordered a fennel and citrus salad. Glad I did. This Sicilian classic rarely disappoints, and this one was so crunchy, sweet and acidic that it wiped my palate clean for the next course to come.
The pizzas are the main event at Nolana, and I would highly recommend the three we tasted. Served on cutting boards with scissors alongside, the pizzas are oval in shape, have minimal toppings and a delicious crisp crust. The first, the traditional margherita (tomato, mozzarella and basil) was just what you want a margherita to be, tangy, chewy and lush. Our wonderful waiter recommended the porchetta pizza that was strewn with thin slices of fatty roast pork, a few dabs of salsa verde and a topping or fresh arugula. I would have liked a bit more here (something spicy?) but that didn't stop me from polishing it off. The third was topped with sausage bits, tomato and nduja (spreadable salami). The cheese on this one was ricotta, and the contrast with the spicy meat was nice, if a bit heavy. Still, the pizzas here are terrific.
We did try one pasta, mozzarellafilled ravioli topped with braised rabbit, escarole, olives, mozzarella and porcini. The portion was small and the price was high ($23), which bothered me at first but by the time this rich dish was finished, I was happy with what we were served.
What I loved here was the way the tender rabbit meat melded with the mushrooms and the pasta pillows. With a few sips of Chianti ... how sensual.
My favourite of the three desserts on offer was a deconstructed cannoli, a little tower of pastry shells, ricotta cream and a swirl of caramelized orange sauce underneath. Yum! I watched my 10-year-old devour the custard-filled bombolone. Served with a glass of sweet milk, these dense doughnuts are perfect for kids, less so for adults looking ahead to bathing suit weather. And then came the Nutella pizza. With a slightly salty crust, thick layer of chocolate/hazelnut cream and a topping of roasted marshmallows, this is hands down the piggiest dish I've eaten thus far in 2015 and hopefully the last. My teeth - and pancreas - are still aching remembering that one.
I'm sure everyone will love it. criticsnotebook@gmail.com twitter.com/LesleyChestrman You can hear Lesley Chesterman on ICI Radio-Canada Premiere's (95.1 FM) Medium Large Tuesdays at 10 a.m., and on CHOM (97.7 FM) Wednesdays at 7:10 a.m.
DINING
PIZZERIA NOLANA
..1/2
$$
444 McGill St. (at St-Maurice
St.)
Phone: 514-544-0344
Open: Weekdays 11:30 a.m. to
11 p.m.; Saturday & Sunday 5
p.m. to 11 p.m.
Website:
www.nolanapizzeria.com
Wheelchair access: No
Licensed: Yes
Parking: On street, meters
Vegetarian-friendly: Yes
Reservations: Essential
Price range: Starters $4-
$22; pizzas $13-$23; pastas
$19-$23; desserts $6-$7.
Ratings:
$ mains under $10
$$ $10-$20
$$$ $20-$35
$$$$ $35+
Credit: LESLEY CHESTERMAN; Montreal Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: ALLEN MCINNIS, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Gian Paolo De Riggi makes a porchetta pizza at Pizzeria Nolana. The pizza cooks at high temperatures (about 750-degrees F) for less than two minutes.; / The dining room is a long, thin, window-lined room decorated with wood panelling.; / Ravioli topped with braised rabbit, escarole, olives, mozzarella and porcini.; / The Marguerita pizza is served with shears rather than a knife.; / The deconstructed cannoli is the featured dessert.

