On the hottest day of the year, Urgences-santé said its crews were struggling to respond to an increased number of emergency calls in the Montreal area.
The organization urged people on Monday to call 911 only in the case of a life-threatening emergency.
Spokesperson Benoit Garneau said people can dial 811 to contact Info-santé if they have non-urgent health problems.
"If people are capable of standing, if they're conscious and alert and have minor problems, they shouldn't call 911," he said.
More than 1,200 people in the Montreal area called 911 on Sunday - approximately 200 more than usual.
At least 30 of those calls were directly related to the heat.
At the end of the day, Urgencessanté said paramedics responded to more calls Monday - and more heat-related emergencies - than Sunday.
The week ahead seemed to promise more of the same.
Urgences-santé increased the number of ambulances it has operating in the Montreal area to about 90.
Even with more crews, delays have increased, Garneau said, especially for calls that aren't lifethreatening.
"If your situation is urgent, and you call us, you're going to have an ambulance, but unfortunately we have ambulances that are on nonurgent calls when they shouldn't be," he said.
Montreal police and firefighters were also busy Monday going door-to-door making sure the city's elderly weren't overburdened by the heat.
According to the Montreal fire department, the city has a list of 55,000 addresses of people who are considered vulnerable during a heat wave.
SPVM spokesperson Jean-Pierre Brabant said officers were asked to pay special attention to the elderly and the homeless during the heat wave.
René Heroux, a meteorologist at Environment Canada, said the warm, tropical air mass hovering over the city this week comes from the southern United States. He said the temperatures aren't rare for Montreal, but the high humidity is.
"The humidity we're having is unusual," he said. "When you combine high temperatures with high humidity, you get a high level of discomfort."
On Monday, temperatures climbed to 35 C but felt like 43 with the humidity factored in. Hot, indeed, but not yet a record: On July 2, 1931, the mercury shot up to 36 C in the city at a time when air conditioning was not widespread.
On Friday, the city warned Montrealers to drink lots of water, stay out of the heat and avoid physical activity as much as possible during the heat wave.
CREDIT: MATTHEW LAPIERRE;The Gazette

