Montrealers spend much of the year longing for the dog days of summer to keep us going through the deep freeze of winter.
So when the city sizzles through an oppressive hot spell, many of us just shut up and sweat it out, since summer is as fleeting as it is occasionally unbearable.
But last week's punishing heat wave, when the mercury soared about 30 degrees Celsius and stayed stuck there for seven days, was a wake-up call for citizens of this winter city.
For starters, it was a tragedy, blamed for claiming more than 70 lives across Quebec, 34 of them in Montreal. From what we know, most of the dead were the elderly, sick and vulnerable, who didn't have air conditioning and often expired in excruciating fashion and alone, some found only days later because of the smell emanating from their sweltering homes.
It was a stark reminder that summer isn't all fun and games. It has a dark side we don't often see when we experience it elsewhere as gleeful tourists, or during the relatively few days a year the sun typically beats down on Montreal. We've had hints of this before, namely the sultry summer of 2010, when more than 100 died. But last week's smothering heat was an urgent warning, a harbinger of a hotter future for which Montreal is ill-prepared.
According to data recently published by the Prairie Climate Centre at the University of Winnipeg, Montreal - along with much of the rest of the country - must brace for more prolonged hot spells, the likes of which we endured last week. The Climate Atlas of Canada allows the public to take stock of the potential impact of human-caused climate change in their own backyards.
The data on Montreal shows that the average annual number of very hot days (when the temperature rose to 30 C or greater) was a manageable eight between 1976 and 2005.
But an analysis projects that the total could jump to a mean of 24 each year between 2021-50 and 50 per year from 2051-80 if carbon emissions continue at their current rate.
The same scientific analysis suggests the number of 30 C and hotter days would be reduced slightly in a low-carbon scenario, if emissions are kept in check.
But either way, Montreal ought to be bracing for such heat waves to become longer, more intense and more common.
This comes as heat records worldwide are being shattered this year.
And yet, Montreal is woefully ill-equipped to handle the havoc summer could throw our way. Some hospital wings and longterm care homes don't have air conditioning, as patients recovering from surgery at Notre-Dame Hospital found out the hard way. Some brought their own fans or had to cover themselves with wet towels.
A few hot days last September underscored the fact that very few schools have air conditioning. This may be unsurprising in central Montreal, where many school buildings are old, crumbling and in need of renovation. But not all new schools are constructed with AC, either - which is short-sighted, in light of what we know about the local effects of global warming.
Cities around the world are taking stock of and planning for the fallout from climate change, from higher sea levels to wild weather. Part of this is preparing for and working to avoid disasters, like the flooding we saw in parts of the Montreal region last spring, or the wildfires that scorched Fort McMurray in 2016.
The other part of it is developing policies, protocols and regulations to make cities more resilient, so they can withstand various climate-related phenomenon to begin with. From zoning that protects natural assets like wetlands, investments in green space, and updated building codes that take into account the future needs of residents, such critical measures are required to mitigate what lies in store.
The city of Montreal adopted its first five-year climate adaptation strategy in 2015 to tackle many of these issues head on. But when it comes to the resources and the basic means for dealing with heat, we're starting from way behind. Sending firefighters door to door and imploring the public to check on their neighbours is a crisis response. That's not going to cut it long-term, when broiling summers become the norm.
In Montreal we know winter.
We know wind chill and flurries, ice storms and blizzards. We know snow plowing, salting and de-icing. In other words, we have the experience, the know-how, infrastructure and the accompanying budgets to handle almost anything winter throws at us.
But as last week's events clearly demonstrate, we now must treat summer with the same seriousness. ahanes@postmedia.com
CREDIT: ALLISON HANES;The Gazette

