The impact of last week's nearly hour-long blackout at the MUHC superhospital was far more serious than publicly disclosed, as surgeons had to resort to using flashlights to finish operations already in progress, the Montreal Gazette has learned.
The flashlights were easy to find, because for the first six months after the superhospital opened in 2015, the McGill University Health Centre stocked the operating rooms with plenty of flashlights and batteries in case of feared blackouts, a highly placed source said.
Since its opening, the sprawling Glen site facility in Notre-Damede-Grâce has been plagued by a host of electrical problems, from faulty wiring in the ORs to power limitations that require the MUHC to shut off the air conditioning in the packed cafeteria and atrium during heat waves.
The darkened ORs quickly turned hot and stifling on July 23 as the power was also cut to the dedicated ventilation systems.
Following that blackout, MUHC officials launched a joint investigation with the private consortium in charge of maintaining the superhospital to determine the possible causes of the outage beyond a defective back-up generator.
"Oh my God, they actually had to finish surgeries using flashlights," a second source told The Gazette. "This raises the question: how often do they inspect the backup generators? "It's ludicrous, completely irresponsible," added the same source, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue.
The MUHC released a statement on July 25 that confirmed the blackout affected the emergency department and operating rooms, but it did not mention that flashlights were deployed during surgery.
"Some patients ... experienced delays and have had their care plans modified," the statement said, without elaborating on exactly how patients were affected.
Richard Fahey, director of human resources, communications and legal affairs at the MUHC, denied on Wednesday that the public hospital network was less than forthcoming by not disclosing that surgeons had to use flashlights.
"The power outage was disclosed to the public via a press release on our website and social media, including the fact that the ORs were affected," he said in an email. He did not address why the MUHC did not disclose that flashlights had to be used.
Pressed for more details, Fahey revealed for the first time that "because one of the 11 generators did not function properly, all adult ORs were without full power during 51 minutes.
"That being said, anesthesia machines and other equipment that had battery backup were operational," he added. "Only two adult patients were in the ORs at the time of the power outage. All patients undergoing procedures during the power outage were informed that their procedures were completed with limited resources under the skilful hands of MUHC surgeons."
Still, there is mounting anger among senior MUHC managers toward Groupe immobilier de santé McGill (GISM), the private consortium headed by engineering firm SNC-Lavalin that installed the electrical system during the construction of the superhospital. GISM officials were not available for comment Wednesday.
Critics of public-private partnerships in England - where such projects were pioneered - have accused private consortia of placing profit over safety in the construction of hospitals. The MUHC public-private partnership was supposed to prevent any cost overruns, but the provincial government in January paid GISM $108 million, on top of the $1.3-billion contract, to settle a lawsuit.
The government settled with the consortium despite previous comments by Health Minister Gaétan Barrette that "this lawsuit is not based on justifiable grounds."
The Montreal Gazette has also learned that employees at the Glen site have been complaining of headaches because the air exchanges are turned off overnight to save on electricity costs, leaving stale air throughout the complex of buildings.
The MUHC is under tremendous pressure by Barrette to cut its deficit despite increasing clinical volumes.
Fahey of the MUHC did not respond to a question about the air exchanges. But he did emphasize that "the MUHC considers the 51-minute power outage a serious event and is working diligently with its partner, GISM, to significantly reduce the risk and prevent a similar event from occurring again." Dr. Pierre Gfeller, the newlyappointed executive director of the MUHC, is overseeing the investigation with GISM.
Blackouts in ORs are extremely rare, but not unprecedented. In 2011, generators in two hospitals in San Diego failed and staff had to use flashlights to illuminate some areas and battery packs were used on patients with ventilators. aderfel@postmedia.com Twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel
CREDIT: AARON DERFEL;The Gazette

