Nearly three weeks after a blackout forced surgeons to use flashlights during operations at the MUHC superhospital, authorities have completed their investigation and are now reviewing contingency plans in the event of another outage.
The private consortium in charge of maintaining the electrical system is also carrying out "corrective measures to our existing processes to prevent a similar situation from arising again." The consortium, led by engineering firm SNC-Lavalin, did not specify the measures, beyond replacing a transfer switch.
Although only one out of 11 power generators failed during the blackout on the afternoon of July 23, the impact was disproportionate and wide-ranging, raising questions about the capacity of the backup systems. The most essential clinical areas of the three-year-old superhospital were affected, with all of the ORs and the emergency room plunged into darkness for nearly an hour during a heat wave.
The MUHC also disclosed for the first time Friday - in response to questions by the Montreal Gazette - that in addition to surgery being disrupted when the generator failed to kick in, two radiotherapy machines went down, delaying cancer treatment for some patients.
The Central Users Committee of the MUHC, representing patients and their families, has been cataloguing various power-shortage issues at the $1.3-billion superhospital in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce that opened in the spring of 2015.
"This was a major event that deserves our attention," said Pierre Hurteau, a long-standing member of the users committee.
Nicolas Ryan, a spokesperson for SNC-Lavalin, insisted that despite the generator failure, "the Glen site meets all applicable standards and codes, including its power distribution and backup system."
"The investigation is completed and it has confirmed the hypothesis that a faulty electrical component was responsible for the 51-minute power outage in some of the Glen site's sectors," he explained.
"A transfer switch did not function correctly, which led to one of 11 generators not starting. All transfer switches and generators were verified following this incident and all are now in good working order. We can also confirm that the generators have enough capacity to power all essential services at the facility."
"A thorough investigation into the incident resulted in our teams taking corrective measures to our existing processes to prevent a similar situation from arising again," Ryan added, without elaborating further.
Gilda Salomone, a public-relations official for the MUHC, issued a statement on Friday asserting that "all generator systems have since been verified and are again in ready mode. As with any such event, a risk analysis has been conducted and contingency plans are being reviewed."
Salomone was unable to provide details of the contingency plans, saying that's the responsibility of the consortium.
Salomone added that the blackout "affected two out of six linear accelerators used in radiotherapy treatment of cancer patients.
Treatments resumed after power was restored, and no treatments were cancelled as a result."
She reiterated that Dr. Pierre Gfeller, the newly appointed executive director of the MUHC, oversaw the joint investigation, and is "working diligently with our partner ... to reduce the risk to zero of a similar event from occurring."
Electrical problems have hampered the Glen site since before it opened, starting with faulty wiring that had to be replaced in the ORs. In July 2016, the electrocution of a crow on an electrical line indirectly caused a two-hour blackout, resulting in the cancellation of surgeries as the ventilation and other systems rebooted.
And during this summer's heat waves, staff in the cafeteria have resorted to placing cold, wet towels around their necks when the air conditioning is turned off on purpose because of power limitations. Staff also have reported headaches when the air exchanges are turned off for periods overnight. aderfel@postmedia.com twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel
CREDIT: AARON DERFEL;The Gazette

