I am finding lately that getting around anywhere is somewhat of an adventure. Or should I say misadventure? Usually, I take the train from Pointe-Claire to work downtown but sometimes I need to drive in. Last week, on such an occasion, there were no fewer than four cars stopped on different sections of the Decarie expressway, making the already messy drive agonizingly slow. There were flares set up behind one of the cars and I saw a worker filling a pothole the size of a small crater. Passing close to two of the cars, I saw they had badly damaged tires, obviously having made an unfortunate acquaintance with one of Montreal's infamous "nids de poule."
On the drive home to the West Island, all seemed to be going well and I was feeling quite pleased at being able to access westbound St-Jacques from Decarie Boulevard, until a police cruiser pulled in front of an intersection with flashers on and closed the street, detouring everyone up to St-Antoine, which had met a similar fate. All routes were sadly red on my trusty Waze app and I found myself crawling through stops and lights with hundreds of other drivers heading to the 15 to take the 40 home. Just another day on the road, right? Cold, rain, ice, snow. Potholes, traffic, road closures. It really makes one long for warm weather.
But heading for sunshine anywhere on an airline has its own set of challenges.
A few weeks ago, I headed down to Mexico. To catch a 7 a.m.
flight, I left the house at 4 a.m., which is a wonderful time to drive if you want to avoid traffic, although it won't help with the potholes.
Not only does air travel take a lot longer with security checks and lineups, but it has become more expensive with additional charges for luggage and seat selection, and more stressful with people vying to board early so they can find space in the overhead compartment for their carry-ons.
Self check-in and printing your own boarding pass should make things cheaper, but airlines are trying to make additional money on seat selections. They are shortening the time for online seat selection from 24 to 12 hours and the time when you can select your seat only at boarding is coming. Soon families will find themselves spread out all over the airplane, unless they are willing to dish out $40 per person (on Sunwing) for a return trip.
Once you are finally on the plane, forget about thinking of catching up on any sleep. The compulsory safety instructions are followed by lengthy advertorials for excursions, menu selections and duty-free purchases. As a result, you are wide-awake and ready for the inflight movie, but with the seat headphone jacks not functioning, you can only watch in frustrated silence and maybe practise your lip-reading skills or compose angry letters to Sunwing that you will never mail.
As I trudge to the train wearing my crampons and praying the train is on time, I hope that soon there will be a snowfall not followed by freezing rain so that I may cross-country ski at Cap St-Jacques, and I remind myself that spring is less than two months away. Hallelujah! Suzanne Korf, a resident of Pointe-Claire since 1991, is a professional fundraiser who has worked for non-profit organizations for more than 25 years. She is a senior director of development for the Montreal Children's Hospital Foundation.
CREDIT: SUZANNE KORF;The Gazette