Heat-weary Montrealers who are finally breaking down and trying to purchase an air conditioner may be in for more frustration as they find many local retailers are out of stock.
"We are out," said Pierre Gagnon, manager of the electrical department at Montreal's largest Home Depot store, in St-Henri.
The store normally orders enough air conditioners to satisfy customer demand throughout the summer, stocking brands like LG, Toshiba, Danby and Comfort-Aire, normally only running out when they start stocking heaters. The stores order based on sales from the year before, Gagnon said.
But this summer, the prolonged heat wave that hit Montreal from June 29 to July 5, with temperatures reaching a high of 35 C on July 2, wiped out his stock. About a week after that, the store got another delivery, and that load was wiped out about an hour after the store opened, he said.
Gagnon said it is pretty much the same story at all Home Depots across Montreal, as well as other retailers.
"We all take our inventory from (the same) suppliers," he added. "Sales would normally be spread out over the whole summer. Now it all happened in one shot. We got emptied. Nobody saw it coming."
He said reordering from the manufacturers is not an option, since orders must be placed months in advance.
"This is all imported. So to get stuff from China into Canada, into the distribution (system) ... by the time it hits the store, it is months and months and months of planning, so it's not like (more units) are readily available."
It was the same story at stores like Walmart and Canadian Tire.
Montreal's downtown Canadian Tire outlet had only three Noma brand 9000 BTU 3-in-1 portable air conditioning units on sale for $449 Tuesday afternoon; by 6 p.m., they were gone. The Canadian Tire on Crémazie Blvd. E. had 11 Noma 5000 BTU window units ($199) left on Tuesday evening, while the other Montreal-area outlets were out or were down to single digits. The Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue store had one, there were two left at the LaSalle store, and one remained in the St-Laurent store.
Mike Powers, a meteorologist with Environment Canada, said the heat wave that hit Montreal was indeed exceptional. While it is normal to get a four-day stretch of temperatures above 30 C with a high humidex at some point every summer, "this time we got seven days, which is pretty rare."
The temperature is returning to around normal for this time of year, with daytime highs of 25 and 27 C respectively on Wednesday and Thursday (the average high at this time of year is 26.5), and nighttime lows of 15 and 16.
On Friday the temperature is expected to reach 30 C again, but with normal humidity, Powers said. And rain on Saturday night and Sunday should bring some relief.
CREDIT: Postmedia News

