"Milk," she said, before collapsing into a snowbank.
It was supposed to be a jaunt to the store but in the midst of a blizzard that paralyzed sections of the city Wednesday, the errand escalated into a Homeric quest across Pointe-St-Charles.
The woman poked her cane into the snow and limped along Liverpool St. before finally giving up. She was swaddled in a parka and headscarf, just a few metres from Depanneur Chez Bert when she hunched over to catch her breath.
"Milk. I need a bag of milk, please," she told a passerby. "Can't go any further."
"Two per cent or whole?" the man replied.
"Two per cent," she said, extending a $5 bill to the stranger.
He stepped into the building and promptly returned with a four-litre bag of milk. She thanked him, rebuffed his offer to walk her home, picked up her cane and trudged back toward the windy street corner.
Outside the city centre - where high winds and snow stranded hundreds of commuters along the highway overnight - the storm brought life to a halt. Entire school boards cancelled classes Wednesday, hundreds of flights were grounded and many workplaces told their employees to stay home rather than brave the elements.
But in and around downtown, the weather appeared much less disruptive. It even seemed to bring out the best in its residents.
At Lafontaine Park, dozens of children relished a rare weekday without school. "Watch me, mom, watch me!" one girl screamed, before jumping onto a plastic saucer and gliding down the hill. Her ride stopped just short of the frozen pond near Rachel St.
"Usually, you only find out about school being closed the morning of and it kind of throws your whole day off," said Julie Robert, who took her daughter to the park Wednesday morning. "But we knew about this ahead of time. So we turned our alarm clocks off and just took our time this morning."
Robert sent a series of text messages to her fellow parents in the Plateau and they all met at the top of the hill - carrying toboggans, snowsuits and a rowdy brood.
"At every street corner you had people joining our little convoy," Robert said. "In the last five years our kids have gone to this school, we've never seen anything like this. If you don't have to shovel out your car, it's really cool, it's an adventure for the kids."
Just south of downtown in Pointe-St-Charles, Ludovic Ratelle frantically cleared a path around his car. Ratelle is on holiday this week but he had one very important job on Wednesday morning.
Because his wife is 39 weeks pregnant - and due at any moment - he had to keep the vehicle on standby outside her parents' home on Mullins St. Ordinarily, Ratelle would be working on a snowplow team for the city of Montreal but today his responsibilities have been narrowed down.
"The timing of this storm isn't great, I must admit," said Ratelle, as he flashed a nervous smile. "We live off-island but we're delivering in Lasalle. We're staying with the in-laws while we wait for the baby to come. So for now my job is to be prepared, shovel out our car, the father-in-law's car and the brother-in-law's car. It's a good day to be off work."
A few blocks south of Ratelle, in a laneway off Paris St., one man furiously blazed a trail into the white mass. He wielded a rusty snowblower, alternately pulling and pushing its handles as though he were breaking in a wild horse.
For a few minutes, he was completely absorbed in the task of clearing a path for his neighbours' vehicles. He stopped only to wipe the frost from his beard and wave to a pedestrian.
"This is perfect, I get to spend the morning outside, breathing that cool winter air," he said, as the machine kicked up a small cloud of exhaust fumes. "I never get to use this baby anymore, I'm like a kid on a day like today."
On nearby Charlevoix St., a column of tractors and snowplows rode the bridge across the Lachine Canal and into St-Henri. Maggie Collis and her dog Brannagh stood by the water, watching the armoured vehicles roll by.
She says she can't remember where she parked her car.
"It's buried somewhere on the side of the street, I'll find it," she said, laughing. "I feel bad for the plow guys, though, they just keep passing and passing and it just keeps snowing.
"Some people hate this but I love winter. When it's sunny and the light reflects off the snow, you can't beat that. Same with the night sky, it's so clear this time of year, it's like being in the country. You can actually see constellations."
While Collis walked back toward Charlevoix St., Brannagh alternated between hopping above the snow and rubbing her face into it.
For Marie, who lives in a social housing unit in Little Burgundy, the storm did little to test her piety. The elderly woman rose early, bundled up and limped across the frosty sidewalks to attend 9 a.m. mass at the Saint-Irenee de Lyon church on Atwater Ave.
"I prayed for those who could not pray this morning," said Marie, who did not want her last name published. "I didn't pray about the weather, there are more important things to worry about in this world than a little snow." ccurtis@postmedia.com Twitter.com/titocurtis
Credit: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Michel Larouche peeks inside to make sure he's shovelling out his own car on de La Roche St. in the Plateau on Wednesday.

