On an overcast January afternoon in 2012, LaSalle resident Gertrude Woschitz Forstinger donned her winter boots, grabbed the leash and took her dog out for a walk. It had snowed, and there was a centimetre or two covering the sidewalks of LaSalle Blvd., a busy thoroughfare.
She stopped to chat with another local resident, then walked a dozen more steps and hit a patch of sheer ice stretching the width of the sidewalk, hidden beneath the sheet of snow. She went down hard, fracturing her right wrist.
There were no signs that any abrasives or salt had been spread. Photos taken by her husband at the scene the next day, as well as the testimony of the man she had been chatting with, backed up her claim.
A nurse, Forstinger was unable to work for a year.
She filed a lawsuit against the city, saying it was negligent in its obligation to keep the sidewalks safe, and therefore to blame for her broken wrist and the ensuing pain, suffering and loss of wages.
Three years later, Judge Suzanne Courchesne agreed. Forstinger was awarded $132,236.
While the payout in Forstinger's case was relatively high, figures provided by the city of Montreal to the Montreal Gazette reveal that lawsuits like hers are not uncommon. Nearly half the time, plaintiffs who take the city to court over a fall win a settlement.
Over a five-year period between 2011 and 2015, the city concluded lawsuits related to falls on city property with 160 individuals.
Of those cases, the city paid settlements 77 times, with the average payout being $16,634.
Most of the payments were settled out of court, with the city and plaintiffagreeing to a settlement in 62 cases. In cases that did continue in court, the city was most often victorious, winning 58 judgments and losing only 15. In the remaining 25 cases, the plaintiffs withdrew their lawsuits.
In total over the five years, the city had to pay $1,264,751, an average of $252,950 a year for falls. In 43 per cent of the cases, the sums are not princely, with payouts of less than $5,000. Snow or ice is listed as a factor in the fall roughly half the time.
The key to winning a case against the city is proving that it was negligent in its responsibilities, within reason.
"The city, just like any owner, has the obligation to maintain its property for it to be safe for citizens, the pedestrians walking on it," said Olivera Pajani, a partner in the Kugler Kandestin law firm, which represented Forstinger. While it's obvious that during a storm, the city is unable to clear all its streets and sidewalks immediately, once the storm is over, it is held to the same standards as any prudent homeowner, who is expected to clear the snow offtheir pathway or put down salt or abrasives.
"People say: 'Well it's Quebec, what are you expecting?'" Pajani said. "It may be Quebec, but if there was freezing rain and you haven't done anything in 24 hours and it becomes an ice rink, well, that's negligence."
In Forstinger's case, the borough of LaSalle had spread abrasives 48 hours before her accident, after days of rain and freezing rain, followed by a sudden drop in temperatures. The judge noted that the borough's policy suggested that abrasives should be spread again in the case of very cold or windy conditions, but it failed to do so.
"There is strong evidence that there was the presence of ice and the absence of abrasives, and the court concludes ... that the work carried out by the city employees, in terms of maintenance as well as inspecting the walkways, were proven to be inadequate, insufficient and in the wrong," Courchesne wrote in her ruling.
Forstinger's payout was large because the city had to cover her lost wages, and because she wasn't found to have contributed to the negligence causing the fall by, for instance, wearing inappropriate footwear, rushing, or being pulled by her dog. As part of the settlement, the court also awarded Forstinger $60,000 for non-monetary losses, referred to as "nonpecuniary damages" for things like pain, suffering, the surgery she had to endure, and moral damages.
Following snowfalls last month, sidewalks in several Montreal boroughs remained icy for days. Officials said technical difficulties, and a desire to save costs associated with sending workers or contractors out to spread abrasives again, played a role.
Pajani said her firm receives calls regularly from individuals who have fallen and want a free consultation to decide whether their case is worth taking to court. In most cases that the firm decides to accept, the plaintiffs are successful, she said. Pictures of the accident scene taken soon after the incident are often the most important evidence plaintiffs can gather. The cost of opening a file at the courthouse and filing a lawsuit may vary between $200 and $800, depending on the amount that is being claimed, Pajani said. The court costs for things like stenographers, bailiffs and photocopies could be in the range of $5,000. If the plaintiff wins, those costs are most often covered by the city. If the plaintiff loses, the court will most often condemn him or her to pay the city's legal fees, but that does not include the lawyers' fees.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com twitter.com/renebruemmer
Credit: RENE BRUEMMER; The Gazette
Illustration MONTREAL GAZETTE / SOURCE: CITY OF MONTREAL

