The only thing crazier than the Canadiens' season might be Montreal's wacky winter weather. In the past 24 hours, Montrealers have seen a bit of everything. Rain, snow, sleet, ice pellets, fog, high winds and freezing rain all took their toll on the province's blinkering power grid.
After a storm blew through southern Quebec on Wednesday night, some 255,000 Hydro-Quebec customers were without power when they awoke Thursday morning.
Hydro crews scrambled into duty and as of 6 p.m. Thursday, that number had been reduced to 91,000 across Quebec, including 670 customers in Montreal. Most of those were in Pierrefonds.
Another 2,200 customers in Laval were also without power. The off-island communities of St-Lazare and Hudson were also hit particularly hard by the storm. More than 2,960 customers in St-Lazare and 1,200 in Hudson were without power at 6 p.m. Due to the power outage, the Town of Hudson activated its emergency measures Thursday evening, inviting citizens to seek warmth and shelter at the Stephen Shaar Community Centre at 394 Main Rd.
Cots were to be set up for the night, and coffee and snacks served to residents, said Mayor Ed Prevost.
"It will be a cold night in Hudson," Prevost added, "but everybody here is on top of the situation."
Prevost said Hydro has assured him power would be restored to local residents as of 12:30 p.m. Friday. While nearly all customers in Montreal could have their power restored by late Thursday night, those in more remote areas outside Montreal could be waiting till Saturday, according to Hydro-Quebec.
While high winds and freezing rain brought down tree branches across the city, the worst hit areas of Quebec were the Laurentians and Lanaudiere regions north of Montreal, said Hydro-Quebec spokesperson Mathieu Rouy.
More than 66,000 customers were still without power in those two regions as of 6 p.m. "Because of the freezing rain, this is where we saw the most power lines taken down by tree branches," Rouy said.
Meanwhile, thousands of students in the West Island and other parts of Montreal got the day off Thursday as darkened schools across the island were closed.
In the east end, about 100 residents in the Hochelaga-Maisonneuve sector were deprived of water when a main burst on Simon-Derome St., near Langelier Blvd.
Mild temperatures also made for slushy conditions on city roads and sidewalks, but that is expected to change by Friday when temperatures dip below zero.
The forecast calls for a high of -10C on Friday, which could turn slushy streets and sidewalks into dangerously slippery patches of ice.
City of Montreal officials are preparing to spread abrasives as needed, said spokesperson Jacques-Alain Lavallee.
He said sidewalk-clearing operations begin once the accumulation of snow on the ground reaches 2.5 cm. The city will spread different abrasives, depending on conditions and types of surfaces. "For example, on roads we use pure salt, while the mix for sidewalks only contains 10 per cent salt and 90 per cent abrasives - usually crushed stone," Lavallee said.
"For pavement, we mainly use pure salt. If the temperature is cold (between -10 C and -15 C) crushed stone is added to the salt because (salt alone) is less (effective). The mixture is 50/50 per cent saltstone. If the temperature drops below -15 C, we use a mixture of 10/90 per cent salt-stone."
Saturday's forecast calls for a high of 2 C, and a 60 per cent chance of flurries and a 70 per cent chance of showers.
So you might need your umbrella again ... in February.
jmeagher@postmedia.com
Credit: JOHN MEAGHER; The Gazette
Illustration DAVE SIDAWAY / Laval resident Riad Kamsl had his hands full on Thursday after high winds and freezing rain brought down tree branches.

