Early Monday morning, every physician in Canada with an email account got notice of a new set of guidelines for managing patients who show up with a drug addiction to a powerful narcotic such as heroin or fentanyl.
Drug deaths numbered about 4,000 in Canada last year, fuelled by a combination of physician overprescribing and a flood of illegal drugs on the streets, including synthetically produced fentanyl and its more powerful cousin, carfentanil.
Published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, the guide aims to stem the public health emergency by streamlining "best practices" for treating opioid users seen by specialists and family physicians.
It recommends giving addicts a drug substitution therapy as a first line of treatment, said lead author Julie Bruneau, a Université de Montréal physician. "So a physician who has a drug user in front of him or her has to do something, rather than say, 'Oh, I don't do this.'" The first line of treatment whenever possible should be Suboxone, a pill combining mostly buprenorphine with a touch of naloxone, to prevent users from crushing the pill to inject. When injected, naloxone cancels the effect of buprenorphine and acts like a narcotic antidote.
"We hope we're not opening a loose conversation, but real dialogue to change regulations at the provincial and local levels," Bruneau said told the Montreal Gazette.
The interview was condensed and edited for space. Q Why was there a need for national guidelines? A If fatalities in the opioid crisis are dramatic, they are also the tip of the iceberg. In Canada, there are many places where access to treatment for opioid use disorder is not easy, and the best treatments are not readily available. So the opioid national guideline is to be seen as tool for the best evidence-based treatment. What is the best option given the patients'circumstances? What should be the standard of care for this population? It's the same type of pragmatic approach that should be used for every disease and condition. Q Why is addiction not treated with the same seriousness and consideration as other diseases? A Addiction is sometimes seen as just a question of motivation. The person is choosing to be addicted. Then there's the illegal nature of the activity that makes the person more of a criminal than a patient. A lot of discrimination is ingrained in our attitudes. Diabetes at the beginning of the last century was seen as weakness of people eating too much sugar - before insulin was discovered. Now we know that addiction is a brain disease, a neurobiological condition. The other reason is the lack of training for most health-care professionals who don't know what to do or don't feel well-equipped to treat people who are using drugs. The guideline is a tool to mainstream opioid disorder and put its treatment on an equal footing as any other disease, which is not the case right now. Q You say that a lot of treatment in Canada is not based on scientific evidence when it comes to addiction. For example? A We strongly recommend not doing short-term withdrawal for opioid use disorder - under a month of tapering down - but it's still practised in many places even though a quick detox is associated with high relapse and risky behaviours that can lead to overdose and transmission of HIV and other infections. When you have someone who is taking drugs, the popular thinking is that he should go into rehab, fix his problem, and stop taking the drug. Q Why is buprenorphine recommended as a first line of treatment for addiction? A What we did in this guideline, which hasn't been done before, is put treatment options in relation to a continuum of care. Not just for specialists but for family physicians and health-care professionals in general. It's first line because the scientific literature said it's the best treatment and with the best outcome. On top of it, it's preferred because this medication is easier to prescribe. It's safer and less toxic and has fewer side-effects. It's more suitable for use in primary care. There's no reason why a drug user can't be treated in a doctor's office. And if it is not stabilized, then the patient can be referred to a specialist, as with any other disease. Q From the perspective of the patient, what are some obstacles for those seeking treatment? A There is a lot of stigma and discrimination associated with drug use. By the time they come to a hospital or clinic, patients are distrustful of the system. They don't feel welcome. Just getting health care is really hard. If you have access to primary care, you have access to screening, prevention and treatment for your other conditions. It's not an on/off situation where a patient comes to a doctor's office, gets stamped as drug user, and is referred directly to treatment for addiction. A patient is a person with lots of complex issues, and drug use is one issue. Good-quality primary care (at the family physicians clinics) could make a big difference in their lives - and the landscape of what is happening with the opioid crisis. Q From the perspective of public health, what are some of the challenges of treating narcotic addictions? A There are several. It's a complex and chronic condition. But we often think of it as something that has to be treated acutely, like short-term detox. But from a public health perspective, it needs more of a harm-reduction approach - because of HIV, hepatitis and other infections associated with drug injection. Q How did these guidelines come to be? A Based on a review of the scientific literature (meta-analysis of studies and randomized trials), we outlined draft recommendations that have been through two cycles of revisions by experts in Canada. And then after those two, they were reviewed by international experts and groups of patients and other people affected by drug use. They have to be in line with the preferences and values of patients where they're supposed to be applied. cfidelman@postmedia.com
CREDIT: CHARLIE FIDELMAN;The Gazette

