With the Montreal area avoiding the worst of the weekend storm, the number of Quebec households without power was down from a high of 140,000 to below 14,000 by Sunday night, most of them on the South Shore.
The cause of the outages there was "galloping" power lines, said Cendrix Bouchard, a spokesperson for Hydro-Québec. This can occur when freezing rain creates icicles on transmission lines and towers, and high winds lift them up, creating a galloping, or jumping, motion.
Repair crews had to wait for high winds to subside before they could repair the lines, Bouchard said.
"The winds have dropped and we have made good progress."
On Sunday morning, Hydro-Québec had some problems with its computer system, which was giving inaccurate numbers on outages, but the issue was resolved by afternoon, Bouchard said.
Environment Canada had issued weather warnings Saturday forecasting freezing rain, turning to ice pellets overnight Saturday to Sunday.
That's what we got, but the switch to ice pellets happened sooner than expected, said meteorologist Simon Legault of Environment Canada.
That meant streets, sidewalks and highways in Montreal were not as treacherous as feared, he said.
"It's less slippery this morning than what it could have been," Legault said.
The city of Montreal issued a statement Saturday saying it was closely monitoring weather conditions and would spread abrasives on streets and sidewalks as needed.
The less-than-expected amount of freezing rain also decreased the risk of branches falling on power lines, Legault said.
While the South Shore, Quebec City and other regions were hit by major outages, widespread blackouts were averted in Montreal and Laval.
"In the Montreal area, it's less impactful than what we expected," he said.
The ice pellets formed a layer on roads that some drivers said felt like driving on sand over a thin layer of ice.
Transports Québec warned drivers to be wary of slippery conditions, especially on the South Shore and highways along the St. Lawrence River.
By the end of the month, the weather is expected to turn to more typical winter conditions, with bitterly cold temperatures and little precipitation, Legault said. Postmedia News

