Pamela Hart remembers the first time she set foot in Le Cagibi, about 10 years ago. The Canadian-born New-Zealander, freshly arrived in Montreal, was lost, wandering up St-Laurent Blvd., looking for this place with the strange name to meet her "kindof" date.
"There was nothing around, every (storefront) was empty. I was stressed because I had gone the wrong way - I hadn't ridden a subway before," Hart said. "Then I pop into this sanctuary of queer, comfortable, alternative space."
That space is soon to become the latest victim of gentrification in Mile End. Le Cagibi is a vegetarian café-restaurant-indie showbar being edged out of its location at the corner of St-Laurent and St-Viateur St. (right across from Ubisoft), which it has occupied for the past decade - two decades if you count Café Esperanza, from which Le Cagibi sprung.
Since the fall, Le Cagibi has been in negotiations with its new landlords, who are seeking to more than double the current rent of $3,417. The landlords proposed a new rent of $7,500 per month, or $5,000 for half the space. (Le Cagibi occupies two connected addresses: the main café, on the corner, and a concert/eating area, next door on St-Viateur.)
"That's a huge increase," Hart said. "We proposed $5,000 (for the whole space), but he said that was absolutely not enough."
In April, Le Cagibi will move to another location, four blocks up, in Little Italy. The new digs are just below St-Zotique St., across from artisanal pub Vices & Versa.
"It's so bittersweet," Hart said, of leaving Mile End. "It feels really sad, to be honest. In the past decade, I've left town a lot of times to work, and when I come back (Le Cagibi) is one of the first places I go to. There's a little wood stool perched by the counter, which doesn't really make sense; but it's the spot we all sit in to come visit our friends working, and order a chai latte or a coffee or a chili. It's the end of an era."
And a sign of the times. "There are lots of comments going around that Lululemon opening (on St-Viateur Ave. and Parc Ave.) was really a marker in Mile End," Hart said. "It's the same with our building now. People know what's coming."
The building in which Le Cagibi is located is co-owned by Jeremy Kornbluth and Brandon Shiller, who previously owned the building now rented out to Lululemon on St-Viateur, before the building was sold to real estate magnates Danny Lavy and Stephen Shiller (Brandon's father) in 2015; Kornbluth and Brandon Shiller are also owners of a building at Jean-Talon Market where a controversial Starbucks was located from 2015 to 2017 (a petition against the outpost garnered more than 9,000 signatures).
Since 2014, Kornbluth and Brandon Shiller along with Lavy and Stephen Shiller (co-owners of Shiller Lavy Realties) have bought up no less than seven commercial properties, between them, along the small yet iconic strip of St. Viateur St. that is the heart and soul of Mile End. Along the way, they have been involved in the changeover of other businesses along the street, including the former Pâtisserie & Boulangerie Clarke Inc. (which closed in 2015 after 35 years and is now a sushi restaurant); Bishop & Bagg Pub (formerly a longstanding neighbourhood dive, located in a building owned by Shiller Lavy Realties); and were instrumental in attracting Gordon Ramsay to town for his ill-fated stint at Laurier BBQ.
Shiller Lavy Realties own other properties on Laurier, including one at the corner of Jeanne-Mance, until recently the home of Pâtisserie De Gascogne, which closed in late December after 60 years; and one at the corner of Esplanade, which was torn down in a storm of controversy last February due to the roof caving in after years of neglect (during which Shiller Lavy reportedly filed several requests to convert and/or replace the building, all of which contravened city heritage laws).
At the time, Projet Montréal's Marie Plourde, councillor for Mile End, had spoken out about the city's inaction regarding precious buildings being abandoned into disrepair. Cagibi's current predicament raises another question for Mayor Valérie Plante's newly elected Projet Montréal: what can the city do to help small business owners who, unlike residential tenants, are not protected by rent control? "It's a difficult situation, where someone can buy a building and say, 'You know what? It doesn't matter that this has been a cultural, community space for 10 years-plus. We're just going to jack that rent, so it's not going to work anymore,'" Hart said. "There's no legislation around commercial leases."
Plourde's schedule didn't permit her to speak with the Montreal Gazette, Friday afternoon, according to Projet Montréal's press attaché. The Gazette's attempts to reach Kornbluth, Brandon Shiller and Shiller Lavy Realties for comment were also unsuccessful.
"We know what's going to happen on (this) corner," Hart said. "It's sad - aside from the fact that we won't be there anymore, it won't be a space that fits the essence of the neighbourhood."
Le Cagibi was one of the last holdouts of Mile End of old. Previous occupant Pharmacie Esperanza (which was renamed Café Esperanza) made a point of maintaining the history of the space it took over, previously home to an actual pharmacy, by keeping and using the business's vintage wood drawers and shelving system - which Le Cagibi continues to use. There is no guarantee the next tenants will be so conscientious.
Le Cagibi was also home to some very under-the-radar music acts, making it - along with the soon-to-close Divan Orange - an example of the challenges of reconciling Montreal's identity as an indie-music mecca with its booming real estate market. Le Cagibi's artsy essence is summed up in the fact that the privatelyowned (by two former Esperanza employees) business is in the midst of transforming into a coop, comprising several of its staff.
"It's so much work," said Hart, who is co-op president. "But it's empowering and exciting in a lot of ways. Being part of a workers'co-op means more agency and more benefits. We're creating something for ourselves, an employment situation that is more secure for us in the long run. It's unusual for people in these kinds of environments to have that kind of empowerment."
While its lease in its current location is good for one more year, Le Cagibi will move to its new location this spring. The new space has only one room, and so will not feature a permanent live music component for the moment; but there are hopes of finding a "sister space" to accommodate live acts in the future.
Hart and her partners'next challenge is raising money for the move and the renovation of the new location, which will cost an estimated $65,000. A GoFund-Me campaign with a goal of $35,000 has pulled in $6,800 in its first two weeks, which makes Hart hopeful.
And they have already taken action to avoid ending up in their current situation again: Le Cagibi has signed a 10-year lease at the new locale, with first right to buy should the building be put up for sale. tdunlevy@postmedia.com twitter.com/TChaDunlevy
To support Le Cagibi's crowdfunding campaign, visit lecagibi.ca.
CREDIT: T'CHA DUNLEVY;The Gazette

