My neck is sore. My back is aching. My arms are like spaghetti.
No, I didn't try to break any Olympic weightlifting records by hoisting a barbell over my head. This is how I feel after two days of pushing a stroller around town on Montreal's snowy sidewalks. Since Saturday, the city has been blanketed in nearly 40 centimetres of snow at last count.
But not all of it fell in one go, complicating clearing efforts that Montrealers love to complain about in the best of times.
But on this occasion they have reason to gripe. Before the tractors and plows completed their cleanup after the first dump, the skies opened again (and again) covering their tracks.
The result is a winter wonderland that is beautiful to behold but difficult to navigate - for some more than others.
I have sympathy for drivers, who have to dig out their cars, scramble to find one of the few unburied parking spaces and drive down streets reduced to a single lane in some instances while awaiting snow-clearing operations.
Public transit users also face obstacles. Passengers waiting on platforms are getting pummelled by snow tsunamis as commuter trains arrive in some stations. Bus riders have to jump snow banks and slush puddles getting on board or disembarking.
Winter cyclists, I salute you. You are bold and much braver than I will ever be. But it looks like many bike paths are getting cleared, so you're probably having an easier time getting around.
Pedestrians on the other hand, seem to be an afterthought. On some streets they are forced to walk single file like goats along a mountain cliff. Even on major roads that have been plowed - once, perhaps, at some point in the midst of these never-ending squalls - there is enough soft snow underfoot to make walking slippery and slow. Try shoving a 27-pound toddler in a stroller through the drifts and you start to feel like Sisyphus - even if you don't actually have to climb a hill.
As I trudged along over the past few days, with other pedestrians stuck behind me or forced to stand aside to let me pass, I started to wish I had a blade mounted on the front of the stroller.
Given it felt like shovelling anyhow, at least I could have cleared a path in the process. (Note to potential inventors: feel free to steal this idea. Just let me test drive the prototype, OK?) Of course, pushing a stroller is nothing compared to the challenges faced by those with mobility issues. Is it even possible to get around in a wheelchair right now given the depth of the snow and the narrowness of the passageways? Those needing crutches or a walker wouldn't fare much better due to the unevenness of the snow-covered ground. Anyone who is a bit unsteady faces real hardship.
I had to take the arm of an elderly woman struggling to keep her balance clambering through a snowbank that a private contractor had left in the middle of the sidewalk after plowing out an apartment building parking lot downtown. I guess they figure the elusive sidewalk plows will push it aside. Eventually ...
City crews struggle to keep up with the demand, even as they work around the clock. Dense boroughs like the Plateau-Mont-Royal, Cote-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grace and the beleaguered Sud-Ouest seem to be the toughest to get a handle on. But five, going on six, days after the first flakes fell, clogged sidewalks are becoming a security risk.
Don't get me wrong. I love winter. I prefer snow to horrid freezing rain that turns the streets into luge tracks and covers the parks in glacial ice the consistency of cement. I thrive on confronting the elements. But winter is best enjoyed when you have nowhere to go in a hurry.
If only we could find a way to bring the serenity of a crosscountry ski trail or the thrill of a toboggan run to everyday life.
If we find ways to embrace the season and its transportation possibilities rather than fighting it all the time, winter might be far less miserable.
How about snowshoe trails through back alleys or an urban skateway traversing the city? Why not a snowmobile lane over one of the bridges or along a major artery? Practically speaking, not every road can be transformed into an outdoor enthusiast's playground. But until then, I'll count down the days until we get heated sidewalks on Ste-Catherine Street.
Credit: ALLISON HANES; The Gazette
MARIE-FRANCE COALLIER / Raymonde Castonguay walks past snow-covered vehicles in the middle of St-Philippe St. to avoid the icy sidewalk in the southwest of Montreal on Thursday. Two major snowfalls in the past week have city crews scrambling to keep up with snow-clearing efforts.

