Residents across the Montreal region may have hunkered down over the weekend with candles, a supply of water and non-perishable snacks in anticipation of an all-too familiar threat from Mother Nature.
Mercifully, the freezing rainstorm that hit Saturday night into Sunday morning turned out to be less dire than forecast, though it did knock out power to more than 130,000 Hydro-Québec customers.
On Monday morning, however, many people were shaken awake by another natural phenomenon. A 3.6-magnitude earthquake centred along the Quebec-New York border rocked a broad swath of Quebec, from Rigaud to St-Bruno. Fortunately it caused no material damage or injuries. But the tremor is a reminder of a potential danger for which we are ill prepared.
Montreal actually sits on a continental "weak spot," explained Christie Rowe, a professor of Earth and Planetary Sciences at McGill University and the Canada Research Chair in Earthquake Geology, making it prone to seismic activity.
"The St. Lawrence lies in a very old fault zone. It's pretty wide. It goes from the Laurentians basically down to the U.S. border. And the fault formed when the Atlantic Ocean was opening, so hundreds of millions of years ago," she said. "But faults in continents never fully heal. So it's always this weak spot."
The last "Big One" to rattle the area occurred in 1732, said Rowe, but predicting the next one is notoriously difficult.
"We don't understand the timing of earthquakes when they're not on a plate boundary," she said. "They're totally unpredictable. We know looking back in history that there've been a few since Europeans arrived. That could mean we have one tomorrow, it could mean we don't have another one for 500 years."
The rarity and lack of certainty around their timing may make the risk easy to ignore compared to more imminent threats like spring floods or blizzards, but even a moderate earthquake could be incredibly damaging in Montreal.
"I can only imagine what would happen to the Olympic Stadium," Rowe said. "We're not built for this type of risk."
In 2013, the Insurance Bureau of Canada released an eye-opening and sobering study examining earthquake risk in the two seismically volatile regions that are home to 40 per cent of the population.
It estimated that a 9.0-magnitude quake and resulting tsunami in British Columbia could cause as much as $75 billion in damages. Meanwhile a major convulsion of magnitude 7.1 along the St. Lawrence fault line could cause losses in excess of $60 billion, while crippling the economy.
The IBC research outlined the dual threats in financial terms. Journalist Kathryn Schulz chronicled the humanitarian and civilizational toll, if - or likely, when - the Cascadia Subduction Zone off the Pacific coast gives way. The piece, published in the New Yorker, won the Pulitzer Prize in 2015.
At once understated in tone and alarming in effect, the article might have jolted cities on the West Coast into action and prompted people in the Cascadia danger zone to stock up on First Aid kits.
Montrealers may know how to confront the ravages of an Ice Storm after shivering through 1998. And we are commemorating the devastation of the quake that hit Haiti 10 years ago, given Montreal's close ties to that country. Yet it seems there is little awareness about what to do if the ground starts trembling here.
"We 100 per cent don't take it seriously enough," said Rowe, who grew up in California, where readiness is second nature.
"The immediate risks during the shaking and then during any aftershocks, would be from falling objects and that could be part of the building, it could be windows breaking. So if you start to feel shaking, get under a heavy table or desk so that falling objects won't hit you," she advised. "If people do feel an earthquake in the city, if they're in a modern building that has steel stairwells, those are some of the safest parts of modern buildings. And just stay away from the frontage of any building, stones could be falling."
Rowe suggested holding earthquake drills in Montreal that include schools, public authorities, willing businesses and ordinary citizens. She also invited those who experienced Monday's seismic event to go to Did You Feel It? on Earthquakes Canada's website (earthquakescanada. nrcan.gc.ca) and share their observations to help scientists like herself gather data.
"I'd like the community to know that there are researchers who are working on this and we are trying to better our understanding of it with the hopes of making us safer," she said.
Freezing rain may be a frequent peril for Montrealers, but the latest tremor should be a wake-up call. ahanes@postmedia.com

