It was a glorious weekend, signalling warmer days ahead. Indeed, spring has sprung and my itchy eyes confirm that trees will soon be covered in leaves a softer shade of green.
In a few weeks, I will be sneezing and scratching my head off, due to the seasonal allergies that have been the bane of my existence for the past 50 years.
How am I going to manage getting about with a mask covering my mouth and nose? I have no idea. Not touching my eyes during the itchy season has so far proven impossible.
Forecasters predict a very hot summer, punctuated by heat waves, meaning 30 degrees and over for three consecutive days or more.
In 2018, 66 Montrealers died during a heat wave that lasted from June 30 to July 5. The victims were predominantly old, poor or suffering from mental illness. In 2003, some 15,000 died in France during a Europe-wide heat wave that August.
Heat kills. Add COVID-19 to the mix and watch a perfect storm develop.
Unless we are hit by a blue cosmic flash that will make the virus disappear in time for la Saint-Jean, we may face hell on Earth. Are we ready? Last year, the Montreal General Hospital installed air-conditioning units in 70 of its rooms.
Hôpital Sacré-Coeur turned to its foundation, a charitable organization, to fund the purchase of units for sensitive areas such as palliative care, neurology and neurosurgery.
Only the newer CHUM and MUHC Glen campus are 100-per-cent air-conditioned.
It is estimated that only 30 per cent of Montreal's CHSLDs'patients'rooms are air-conditioned. Read that again.
Paul Brunet, president of the Conseil pour la protection des malades likes to point out that all office areas in health-related establishments are air-conditioned.
To counteract the lack of air-conditioning, hospitals have air-conditioned common rooms where patients can cool off.
Social distancing will probably put an end to this "privilege."
Patients will suffer, especially COVID-19 ones who have trouble breathing, as well as medical staff who wear such protective gear as masks, visors and coveralls often made of non-breathable synthetics.
The heat problem won't be confined to hospitals and residences.
During heat waves, many people seek relief inside shopping malls and movie theatres. Will they be open this summer? Will parks be accessible? Pools? What about wading pools for small children who don't tolerate heat as well as adults? What about Montreal's famed terrasses where cold beers and glasses of rosé cool people off while inducing a nice buzz as the sun goes down? I doubt it. I can't help but worry about the aged, the sick and poor families who live in cramped apartments of dubious salubrity. Who will make sure they are OK? What kind of help is planned when the temperature reaches 30 C? Dying of heat stroke in times of the coronavirus will become all too easy unless preventive and monitoring measures are implemented. The time to act is now.
Watching how the coronavirus crisis has unfolded, I get the impression that health authorities mostly react to what's right under their noses.
They were preparing hospitals for a tsunami of patients that never came, while CHSLDs were turning into hell holes. So then they turned their attention to CHSLDs. Always chasing the next disaster.
We know summer is coming. We know there will be heat waves. We know the virus will continue to be present in Montreal for a while, unless U.S. President Donald Trump is right and this very complicated virus disappears as soon as the temperature rises to the level that sends run-of-mill influenza viruses into hiding. It seems unlikely at this point, given its presence in hot countries and regions also.
Surviving the summer of 2020 may require more than masks and safe distancing. lravary@yahoo.com

