December showers bring January flowers - recent Montreal winter rhyme.
Unseasonal greetings, everyone. Our weirdly tropical December, November, October and September have made weather the hottest topic in town.
Christmas is supposed to come gift-wrapped in swirling snowdrifts, frosted windshields and the wail of tow trucks dragging your car away. It's supposed to make you feel that: "The weather outside is frightful, But the fire is so delightful." Instead it's as warm as Labour Day.
So far there's been no "snow glistening," or "sleigh bells jingling," or cash registers ringing up big winter clothing sales, since we're all dressing for early fall.
There's been no skiing or skating, because people are still skateboarding and golfing. In fact, I've been taking my last bike ride of the year up Mount Royal regularly for the last 30 days.
There are two ways to view our eerie warm weather, depending on your personality type:
TYPE 1 - APOCALYPSE-NOW: If you're a Type 1, it's easy to see signs of approaching doom everywhere. Spring daffodils are blooming in England, roses are blossoming in New York and lush green grass is thriving in your Montreal backyard.
Our city's squirrels have spent so many weeks stuffing themselves silly for hibernation they look fat enough to explode.
TYPE 1 fears we are seeing a Dickensian "Ghost of Christmas Future" - a glimpse of Montreal in 20 years as climate change increases, making every winter this warm, or warmer.
They envision a bleak, snowless time when our rivers are drying up - and there are swamp tours run in the St. Lawrence Everglades Forest to see the parrots and alligators.
A time when droves of refugees from flooded Florida arrive each day, seeking safety in shacks built on the high ground of Mount Royal - and there's talk of building a wall to keep them out, under Prime Minister Trudeau the Third.
A time when skiing and hockey are only memories, replaced by desert beach volleyball and camel-racing in the Lake St. Louis Gulch.
Type 1 just can't enjoy this winter's warm weather, without feeling irresponsible. Yet there's another kind of person who feels that complaining about a warm winter is unnatural for a Canadian. They are: TYPE 2 - PARADISE FOUND: These snow-weary Canadians have had enough of the white stuff, especially after last winter's Snowmageddon. They feel guilty, but happy.
They say things like: "I know the warm winter is bad for the planet, but it feels good to me. ... No, I'm sorry. I apologize - I shouldn't have said that. I know its wrong, very wrong. Only it feels so wonderful!" Many of them did miss having a White Christmas - but only yesterday. Today they see many benefits of a warm winter.
With no snow falling, the City's saved a bundle on snowclearing while the rest of us save on home heating. People are mostly in a good mood - no one's complaining about icy sidewalks and poor snow removal.
Our roads are so snow and ice-free we may not even get our usual crop of spring potholes to complain about.
There's not even any reason to book a winter holiday in Florida, since the last week's weather brought Miami to Montreal - where Canadian money is still accepted at par.
Type 2 knows there's something about this winter that's creepy - but they'd rather worry about it later.
In fact this winter, the weatherman is in their camp. According to meteorologists our warm winter isn't much due to global warming.
It's mainly caused by the El Nino Southern Oscillation - a warming phenomenon in the Eastern Pacific that hits every five years. Only this year they're calling it "the Godzilla of El Ninos."
Snow and ice may have gone missing here, but they've showed up in Texas, Mississippi and California - while Calgary and Vancouver ski slopes are buried in snow.
We've traded places with Vancouver this year - but it's only fair for them to occasionally share the pain.
Whatever type you are, seize the moment while it lasts. On Dec 17, 2011, I began a Gazette column this way: "This December feels more like October. The streets are filled with people in fall clothing, sneakers and shorts. I've been barbecuing outdoors and biking on Mount Royal - along with hordes of winter joggers usually hiding at the gym."
One day later, winter arrived in a huge snowstorm and the mercury soon plunged to minus 29. So soak up the warmth before a sudden reverse oscillation polar de-vortex brings our winter boots out of hibernation and sends our squirrels into it.
Remember: the shortest day of the year is over and spring is only a heartbeat and several blizzards away.
Frankly, I'm dreaming of a Green New Year's so we can all party outside. But after that: Let it snow, let it snow, let it snow! Joshfreed49@gmail.com
Credit: JOSH FREED; The Gazette
Illustration ALLEN MCINNI, , MONTREAL GAZETTE / Danie Labonville and Yves Blanchard jog in Mount Royal Park on Thursday. Josh Freed urges Montrealers to seize the warm weather while it lasts.

