Editor's note: This is an open letter to the Grand River Conservation Authority.
Dear GRCA (and others),
The news is once again filled with tragic stories of flooded communities both close to home and throughout this country. It has become increasingly obvious to expert and layman alike that the effects of climate change are upon us.
The members of the Nith River Flooding Action Committee respectfully submit this letter to you in the hopes of galvanizing our resolve to work together to protect our town from the future flooding of the Nith River.
We are witnessing the results of a delayed response to the maintenance of a dike system (not unlike our dike on the Nith River) by the events in Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac in Quebec.
From the Montreal Gazette:
For at least 18 months, the city of Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac has known its dikes needed repairs. Mayor Sonia Paulus requested funding to modernize the 43-year-old structure in 2015, but work was only scheduled to start next fall... And reports suggest the city may have known of serious problems with the dike as early as 10 years ago... At the time, the recommendations of experts was that the dike be raised by two feet.
When the members of our organization read this, we could not help but recognize how similar this appears to be to our current situation. Many of the engineers we spoke to have recommended raising the Nith River's dike system by two to three feet to keep flood waters within the confines of the river banks.
It was also suggested that the bridge at the 7/8 Highway is causing a "pinch-point" in the river and backing water up into the city. Our engineering friends have suggested that culverts should be installed to help divert some of the water safely around the structure - a repair already being utilized in some northern Ontario communities with similar problems.
Steps must be taken now to prepare New Hamburg for a future with higher water levels.
From Blair Feltmate, head of the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation at the University of Waterloo,
"At the level of communities, what we should be doing is looking at how we can use things like berms, diversion channels, holding ponds, cisterns, bioswales ... to direct water to safe locations where it can be stored or discharged downstream,"
This sentiment was echoed by a recent Toronto Sun article written by Lorrie Goldstein:
"... adaptation means doing practical things now to help Canadians cope with the impacts of climate change, however it's caused. Adaptation has the bonus of doing things that are worthwhile regardless of whether severe weather is caused by natural, man-made, or 'people made' factors. It includes... rebuilding and reinforcing aging dams, berms and spillways BEFORE they break."
It also makes great fiscal sense. Investing funds now to prevent flooding in the future will save our town money in the long run. Ursule Boyer-Villemaire, an associate professor at the Université du Québec à Montréal who specializes in disaster management and climate resilience planning, sums it up:
"Responding to disaster is going to be a lot more expensive than being proactive in vulnerable sites."
It is our organization's sincere hope that the sentiments expressed by these experts are shared by all levels of our government and the GRCA.
Please let us know how we may assist you in these efforts. Our organization would like to hear your thoughts on this matter.
We are hopeful that we can all work together to find solutions today before they become the problems of tomorrow.
Respectfully,
Richard Quesnel and the Nith River Flooding Action Committee
CAPTION:

