There was the snow plow that punctured the gas line, forcing residents from their homes.
There was the sidewalk plow that rammed into the bicycle and the parking-sign post to which it was tethered, repeatedly, caught on a video that went viral.
There was the plow that pushed the trash lining the sidewalk out into the street, garbage cans and all, along with the snow to be picked up.
But ultimately, it was the failure of the snow plows and snow blowers of Les Pavages D'Amour Inc. to actually clear the snow that convinced the city of Montreal it was time to cancel its $16-million, five-year contract with the firm in the Sud-Ouest borough.
At 11 a.m. Thursday, only 24 per cent of the snow that fell on Sunday had been cleared from the borough's streets, as compared to a city average of 57 per cent.
"The situation in the Sud-Ouest borough is totally unacceptable," city executive committee chairman Pierre Desrochers said. "There has been a breach of trust between the contractor and the borough."
After a meeting with the owners of the firm, Montreal mayor Denis Coderre and several borough mayors Wednesday evening, the city decided it will pass a motion in city council to end its contract with Pavages D'Amour at the end of this season. The contract began this winter.
Complaints to the borough for insufficient snow-clearing were eight times higher than the norm, borough mayor Benoit Dorais said.
The company has been able to fulfil snow-clearing contracts in Lachine, Ahuntsic-Cartierville and on the West Island, but failed in the congested Sud-Ouest neighbourhoods of St-Henri, Little Burgundy, Pointe-St-Charles and Griffintown because they underestimated the amount of work and resources required for a dense urban setting, Desrochers said.
"They bit off more than they could chew," he said.
St-Henri native Jean-Yves Lecompte said the sidewalks were in the worst condition he had seen in his 64 years, with mothers unable to push strollers down the street and seniors frightened to venture out.
The Journal de Montreal ran a story Thursday about 23-year-old epileptic cancer patient Charles-Eric Brown Laroche who has been unable to leave his apartment in his wheelchair since Sunday and can't get to his medical appointments because buses can't get down his street.
The city is confident Pavages D'Amour will fulfil the end of its contract this winter because it has contracts with other boroughs that it will want to protect, Desrochers said. The 40 per cent of the borough cleared by its own blue-collar workers and equipment were well maintained, the city said.
All boroughs use a mix of private contractors and city staff because it would be too expensive for the city to hire the staff and buy the trucks needed for work that is only required five months of the year.
Pavages D'Amour did not return a call from the Montreal Gazette.
In Cote-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grace, which had the second-lowest number of streets among the city's 19 boroughs cleared at 38 per cent, city officials said the density of the neighbourhood, narrowness of some of its streets and high level of street parking make snow clearing more challenging there.
As well, the borough had decided to clear the remnants of the ice storm that fell last week from its streets to be ready for Sunday's storm. Since private contractors must be given a 24-hour break after seven straight days of snowclearing, the borough had to pause much of its operations Wednesday night, borough general manager Stephane Plante said.
They will be working extra time as of Thursday night and into the weekend to catch up, he said.
In suburban areas of the city, less traffic and fewer vehicles parked on the street mean snow plows can clear the roads relatively quickly.
The second step of snow removal is often not required in many suburbs because plows push the snow to the edge of residential properties.
"I must admit though, it is simpler (here) than in Montreal because we have a no-parking law in the winter for overnight," Beaconsfield Mayor Georges Bourelle said. "So when there is a storm we start working around midnight, between midnight and 2 a.m. depending on the storm, and we can rapidly go through our city."
The municipality deploys about eight to 10 trucks to clear snow from approximately 125 kilometres of roads and another 30 kilometres of sidewalks.
John Meagher of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report rbruemmer@postmedia.com
Credit: RENE BRUEMMER; The Gazette
ALLEN MCINNIS / A woman cleans the sidewalk in front of her Workman St. home as contractors remove the snow in Montreal yesterday.; ALLEN MC INNIS / No parking signs are not collected but get swept up with the snow clearing in Montreal on Thursday.

