Leonard Cohen had a great sense of humour, but what strikes me most about his new video, Happens to the Heart, is how devoid of humour it is.
On Friday, Sony Music launched this "new" Cohen song, one of the tracks on the posthumous album Thanks for the Dance, which will be released Nov. 22. Cohen, arguably the most famous singer-songwriter to ever come out of Montreal, died on Nov. 7, 2016, at the age of 82.
Thanks for the Dance was built from bits and pieces of songs left over from the making of Cohen's last album, You Want It Darker, and was pulled together by his son Adam. The album features Daniel Lanois, Damien Rice, Beck, Feist, Arcade Fire's Richard Reed Parry and others.
The video for Happens to the Heart is directed by Daniel Askill, who has made videos for Sia and French band Phoenix, and is inspired by Cohen's experience as a Buddhist monk. It shows a young man walking through a lush forest; at the beginning, he is filmed from behind at a distance, wearing a Cohen-esque outfit, including a fedora and a dark trench coat. He eventually takes off all his clothes, meets a person who looks like a Buddhist monk and is given Buddhist robes. In the final shot, he sits on the edge of a cliff amid a bucolic landscape and begins to levitate.
Honestly, it's almost a Saturday Night Live spoof of a Cohen video. Happily, the song is quite good - maybe as good as anything on You Want It Darker - with a strong melody and some of Cohen's best lyrics in years. And yes the lyrics are quite droll.
It opens with this verse: "I was always working steady /But I never called it art /I got my s-t together /Meeting Christ and reading Marx."
And climaxes with this: "I had no trouble betting /On the flood, against the ark /You see, I knew about the ending /What happens to the heart."
That's Cohen at his best: funny, self-deprecating, insightful on matters of the heart.
The video is part of a bigger project from the digital channel Nowness that involves acclaimed filmmakers creating videos to accompany these songs.
In a statement, Nowness creative director Bunny Kinney said: "Our ambition with this series of short films is not only to uphold and celebrate Leonard Cohen's incredible artistic legacy with new visuals, helmed by some of the most exciting image-makers working today, but to also further explore Cohen's work and the core the matics of his music: from love and loss to artistic expression itself, identity, self-reflection, transformation and transcendence."
In another statement, Adam Cohen commented on Thanks for the Dance: "In composing and arranging the music for his words, we chose his most characteristic musical signatures, in this way keeping him with us. What moves me most about the album is the startled response of those who have heard it. 'Leonard lives!' they say, one after the other."
I look forward to hearing the album, but watching the video, I feel it misses Cohen's personality. I remember the first time I met him, over smoked-meat sandwiches on the Main in 1989, around the time of his greatest album, I'm Your Man. I entered the restaurant expecting to meet a dark, dour poet, and left an hour later blown away by this remarkable man with a finely tuned sense of humour and a gentleness I had never witnessed from major entertainment stars. bkelly@postmedia.com Twitter.com/brendanshowbiz
CREDIT: BRENDAN KELLY;The Gazette

