Is it spring yet? How about now? Those hoping for a March melt were unpleasantly surprised as colder temperatures descended on Quebec over the past two days. Wednesday's high in Montreal was a nippy -9 C, with a low of -18 C (feels like -25) expected overnight, begging the question: Will it ever get warm around here? "Right now it's colder," explained Alexandre Parent, a meteorologist for Environment Canada. "This week, the average high should be 0. We're around -8 or -9 for today and (Thursday). By Friday it should be closer to 0."
There's no immediate respite - or at least no impending heat wave - but patience will be rewarded if we can just hang on a little longer, according to Parent.
"Next week will at least be near normal, most of the week," he said.
But with 10-15 centimetres of snow expected for Sunday, combined with a risk of freezing rain, he is careful to point out that "winter is not over."
And while Shakespeare would warn us to "Beware the Ides of March," Parent is encouraging people to hold on until mid-month.
"A lot of models are forecasting a system bringing warm air and some rain for southern Quebec, late into next week and next weekend," he said.
In other words, there may be sunshine for St. Patrick's Day. Ah, the luck of the Irish! If that still seems like a long way away, it's understandable. While this winter's average temperature is only one degree below normal, it has been unrelenting.
"It's been long," Parent noted.
"It started Nov. 16 when we got around 10 centimetres of snow, which has stayed on the ground the entire winter."
The hardest thing to endure this winter may have been the accumulation. There were no records broken, but we are above average in terms of precipitation.
"In terms of snowfall, we have had 195 cm so far in Montreal; the average is 160 cm," Parent said. "And since December, we have had 149 mm of rain, while the average is 87 mm. So more precipitation, more weather systems and no breaks this winter."
As anyone who has tried to venture outside their front door over the past couple months knows, it has been an icy one. And it's not your imagination: We have had an unusual amount of ice storms.
"If you look at December, January and February, on average in Montreal there are five days with temperatures above 0 and with 5 mm of rain or more," Parent said. "We had 11 of those days, and all of them were followed by cold temperatures, below 0.
"So it has been a busy winter in terms of weather systems, and there has been higher snowfall, rainfall and more of these rain and then freezing events."
Environment Canada issued twice as many weather warnings for January and February, a result of the shifting weather systems.
All of which leads us to the big question: When will it end? That is to say, will spring be springlike, or will it be a drawn-out, slightly milder version of winter? "This is always difficult," Parent said.
"The forecast for the next three months for southern Quebec is for it to be above average in terms of temperature. That's what we're seeing for the next few weeks, and for April and May as well."
Hallelujah! "But we always have to be careful," he warned. "These forecasts are better than (random guesses), but it's always a challenge. Sometimes it doesn't tell us what the season is going to be like."
The big question is, with all this accumulated snow, how fast is it going to melt? (Hint: faster isn't always better.)
"In terms of possible flooding, the snow mass on the ground is only one ingredient," Parent said. "After that, for flooding you need high temperatures, but you also need rainfall.
"The snow on the ground is higher than normal in Mauricie, Beauce and Quebec City. We have had winters with a lot of snow on the ground in March, but if spring is gradual and there's not too much rain, we could see a quiet season in terms of flooding.
"I don't want to sound alarmist, but because of the snow levels we're following things pretty closely."
In summary: hope is on the horizon, but don't let your guard down. tdunlevy@postmedia.com twitter.com/TChaDunlevy
CREDIT: T'CHA DUNLEVY;The Gazette

