Call it an inconvenient custom, one that Quebecers should toss to the curb.
I'm talking about the July 1 moving day in Quebec. You know what I mean, particularly here in Montreal. Mountains of rotting garbage and discarded junk on the sidewalks.
Bottlenecks on narrow streets as moving vans and trucks jostle awkwardly for space, particularly in high-density neighbourhoods like the Plateau or downtown. Movers, up since dawn, some of them on their second, third or sometimes even fourth job of the day, hauling boxes, heavy appliances and furniture up and down Montreal's spiral staircases. Maybe worst of all is the number of pets abandoned around moving day every year.
Blessedly, I haven't had to endure the hell of a July 1 residential move in some time, but I've never been more grateful than this year, when the mercury spiked to a mind-melting 35 C, or 43 C with the humidity.
Every year, I ask myself the same question: Why do Quebecers put up with this? I still don't have an answer. Contrary to popular belief, it is not a sovereignist "complot" to diminish Canada Day celebrations in Quebec. As the Gazette's Jacob Serebrin explained ("Brace yourself, Moving Day is almost here" Montreal Gazette, June 29), the official July 1 moving date is a practice with origins in the French colonial period, when leases were to expire May 1, to prevent tenants from being evicted in the winter. In time, the law required urban leases to begin on May 1 and end on April 30. Fast forward to 1973, when the Liberal government abolished the law and pushed moving day back to July 1, in part to prevent children being pulled out of school before the end of the year. Since then, Quebec's fixed moving day has not been law, but tradition.
While a lease can be signed with any dates that both parties agree to, the bulk of old leases end on June 30 and new leases begin July 1.
So, in the year 2018, Quebecers just unquestioningly abide by an artificially fixed moving date that is essentially a hangover from colonial times, and is a phenomenon that seems to be unique in North America.
I don't get it. This affects a lot of us, by the way. Quebecers and Montrealers have one of the lowest homeownership rates in Canada. Approximately 63 per cent of Montrealers rent their homes. This year, Radio Canada reported that some 200,000 Quebec households are estimated to have shuffled homes on or around that fixed date, approximately 70,000 of them in Montreal.
The ritual of the July 1 move has been romanticized in books and film. We joke about it in the same way that we joke about our ubiquitous potholes and orange cones, inconveniences that are just an inevitable part of living here, one of those things that makes us different.
Even the international media gets a kick out of exploring this little quirk of ours.
But is it worth it? My concern isn't so much about moving day in Quebec coinciding with Canada Day - although, there is that, too - it's that the whole process is unnecessarily expensive, stressful and chaotic for renters, landlords and residents in general.
Finding a moving company can be impossible unless you book months in advance. When demand exceeds supply, prices go up, and renters can end up paying three times as much for a moving company on July 1. Eliminating the fixed moving date would mean lower rates, less competition and a smoother transition for all involved.
The July 1 moving day in Quebec is an artificial rental timetable. It's no longer the law, but rather an inconvenient custom that serves little purpose. There are many traditions worth saving, but I can't think of a single reason to salvage this one. I say phase it out. It's time to move on. Twitter.com/CooperCeline
CREDIT: CELINE COOPER;The Gazette



