When and how a cool dip in a public pool will be possible this summer remains to be seen.
Quebec has yet to announce when its ongoing relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions will allow for the opening of public pools and with what regulations in place.
Jewish General Hospital medical microbiologist Dr. Leighanne Parkes told the Montreal Gazette the risk of becoming infected with COVID-19 while swimming in a pool is very low because infectious droplets would be immediately be diluted. However, distancing must be maintained to avoid ending up within someone's spit radius.
A number of municipalities are waiting for public health details and government directives before making a decision.
The city of Montreal said all swimming pools and wading pools are closed until it receives new government directives, although many of the city's splash pads opened in time for this week's heat wave.
In the West Island, Kirkland announced that "constraints related to the COVID-19 pandemic" resulted in its decision to not open Ecclestone Pool this summer.
Senneville has gone in another direction. Mayor Julie Brisebois said that the pool is being prepared for an eventual opening. COVID-19 safety measures will include limiting the number of people in the pool so that distancing measures can be enforced and residents will reserve a time slot to use the pool. All aquatic classes are cancelled.
Earlier this month, the Association of Lakeshore Pools announced that all aquatic competitions will be cancelled because of the pandemic. ALPS has 22 member pools in the West Island, LaSalle, Hudson and Pincourt.
Pointe-Claire has not made a decision about opening either its splash pad or its pools.
Dollard-des-Ormeaux Mayor Alex Bottausci said the opening of its splash pads and pools remains under review.
Dorval's splash pad at Walters Park is open, but the city is waiting for word from the government and public health before moving forward with opening its pools and aquatic and sports facility.
Beaconsfield director general Patrice Boileau said the city had heard that pool capacity could be reduced up to 70 per cent, which would make it financially difficult for Beaconsfield's four community pools to operate. He said that once the rules are clear, the various pool boards would meet to discuss options and then meet with the city.
The CRLO-WLRC pool in Lachine is waiting for the government green light and a decision by borough council on financial aid before making a decision. Dixie Pool in western Lachine said it has not made a decision on whether to open the pool, but it would follow all COVID-19 restrictions.
Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue Mayor Paola Hawa said the plan is to open the pool, but the town is still studying how it can be done safely.
The Baie-D'Urfé Aquatic Club is waiting for the government announcement. Like other pools in the West Island, it has sent a survey to members asking about their concerns and whether they would use the pool if it opens this season. Michelle Lalonde contributed to this report. kgreenaway@postmedia.com

