CLABBY Michael, Lyndsey and new big brother, Bronsen Clabby, happily announce the arrival of Sawyer Lloyd Michael Clabby on May 28, 2018.
DAFNA ABELLS
On Friday, June 8, 2018, in her 91st year. Dafna Abells, beloved wife of the late David Abells.
Loving Ima and mother-in-law of Yoel and Karen Abells, and Orit and Glenn Newton. Dear sister of the late Tera Margolin, and Gabi Zalel. Devoted Savta of Alana and Ady, Dara and Jordan, Lyla and Billy, Samara and Adam, Terrin, Jared, Tamara, and Logan.
Devoted Savta Raba of Ethan, Emily, Zoey, and Ryan. She will also be missed by her many nieces and nephews. At Benjamin's Park Memorial Chapel, 2401 Steeles Avenue West (3 lights west of Dufferin) for service on Sunday, June 10, 2018 at 1:00 p.m. Interment Ostrovtzer Society Section of Bathurst Lawn Memorial Park. Shiva 511 Vesta Drive. Memorial donations may be made to Beit Halochem Canada, 905-695-0611 or 1-800-355-1648 or to Alzheimer Society of Canada, 416-488-8772 ext.2631 or 1-800-616-8816.
GYULA ANDRÁSSY "Jules" 1927 - 2018
It is with great sorrow that we announce the passing of Gyula "Jules" Andrássy, on June 4, 2018, at the age of 91.
Born in Budapest on May 4, 1927, he was the son of Mihály Andrássy and Gabriella Andrássy (née Károlyi). He leaves to mourn his wife of 53 years, Lesley (née Trist); his daughter, Ilona (Paul Biron); his son, Michael (Ann Guthrie); and his granddaughter, Gabriella. Heartfelt thanks to the staff of the Résidence Vista and the Château Westmount for their compassionate care.
A private funeral will be held for immediate family members only.
GRACE ELSPETH ANGUS
Montreal, QC. Died peacefully on May 30, 2018 at Chateau Westmount. Predeceased by her mother, Isabella Eleanora Cantlie and her father, Richard Forrest Angus. Survived by her sister, Beatrice Mary Angus Eastcott (Peter); her brothers, Stephen Frederick Angus (Pamela) and John Forrest Angus (Toni); as well as many nieces and nephews.
Her family and friends will miss her greatly.
Elspeth attended The Study School for Girls, Kings Hall Compton and McGill University where she received both a Bachelor and Master degree in Science. After obtaining her degrees, she lived in England and then returned to work in the Department of Pathology, Pathology Institute at McGill University with Dr. W.M.
Thurlbeck. Elspeth was the family historian and had many achievements in her lifetime, including being instrumental in preserving the mission of the Royal Victoria Hospital property and providing leadership in archival work at the Church of St. Andrew and St. Paul. She was the impetus behind the exhibit "War Flowers - a touring art exhibition" which is on an international and panCanadian tour.
A memorial service will be held in the fall in Montreal.
JOHN ANDREW PAUL BROOME
In his 80th year, passed away peacefully with his son, Craig, at his side, on June 2, 2018.
John joins his late wife, Kim, whom he loved more than life and is now reunited. He leaves behind his son, Craig; wife, Cathy; granddaughters, Victoria and Natalee; son, Scott, wife, Karla and her son, Blakely; Tanya Clarke; Trudy Mahood, partner, Jim, son, Joey and his wife, Katie; Shawn Mahood and Theresa Monette (his guardian angel -thank you); mother of his children, Carol Edgar, and great friend later in life; and so many countless friends that have been a part of his life and gave him great happiness in Oakville, Florida, Constance Bay and other special locations around the world - you know who you are.
John enjoyed many years ballroom dancing, travelling and cooking. He lived life to the fullest and enjoyed each day, usually with his wicked wit, mischievous spirit and witty sense of humour, and possibly a Manhattan in hand.
So great to know he is now once again with his true love who brought him much happiness.
Celebration of life to happen at a later date - stay tuned.
MARY JANE HOLMES BAILLIE
Born June 25, 1918, died peacefully on Saturday, June 2, 2018, in Toronto. She was the adored wife of Donald Chesley Baillie (1915-1993), and will be greatly missed by her daughters, Martha Baillie and Christina Baillie; her granddaughter, Emma Lightstone; her son-in-law, Jonno Lightstone; and her extended family and many beloved friends.
A wonderful painter, she has left a rich legacy of work.
www.maryjaneholmesbaillie.ca.
A celebration of her life will be held on Sunday, June 24th, 2-6 p.m., at Gallery 345 (345 Sorauren Avenue, Toronto, ON M6R 2G5). All are welcome
PETER D. COOK January 12, 1939 May 30, 2018
A fighter to the end, Peter passed peacefully in his sleep on May 30, 2018 at home with his loving wife, Barbara at his side. Predeceased by his father, Gunnard, and mother, Ellen (nee Kelly). Loving father to his two sons, Geoffrey and Brent and his daughter, Tara (Darin). Cherished Grandpa and Tickle-Monster of Madison, Emily, Samantha and Zoe.
Peter was born in Winnipeg in 1939 and lived in Montreal and Toronto for the majority of his adult life. He obtained his BSc at the University of Manitoba and then became a certified Chartered Accountant while working at KPMG. After an exciting career with Air Canada and other large corporations, Peter freed the entrepreneur from within and founded several small businesses, including the "Raquetterie" and "Montreal Homeowners Association" in Montreal and, most notably, "Seniors for Seniors" in 1985 and "Seniors for Business" after moving to Toronto. Peter lectured and taught at various colleges and universities, including McGill, U of T and Centennial College and was a published author on the subject of entrepreneurship, "Start Your Own Business, the Canadian Entrepreneurs Guide". He also made many TV, Radio and print media appearances on a variety of business topics and social issues.
He appeared before the Senate of Canada in 2012 to bring the many difficulties experienced by far too many senior citizens in Canada to national attention and was presented the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee medal for community service for his efforts.
Possessing an unrivalled dry wit and work ethic, Peter loved life and had a tremendous sense of adventure. He and Barbara enjoyed many "once in a lifetime trips" which included Africa, Costa Rica, India, Thailand and China among many others. Peter was a member of the Toronto Lawn Tennis Club for close to 40 years where he played tennis and squash. He also played Golf at the Thornhill Golf and Country Club, a sport he picked up in his 50's and, like most things, became quite good at it. He cherished all of his friends from childhood onwards.
We have lost a true original.
Please raise a glass of Scotch in his memory. J&B will be fine.
A celebration of his life will be held at a later date.
TIMOTHY COUGHLAN January 14, 1926 June 7, 2018
Father Tim was born and raised in the village of Hastings beside the Trent River and was ordained as a priest at The Cathedral of Saint Peter-in-Chains, Peterborough on May 19, 1951. Then, at the age of 25, Fr. Tim began his service as a parish priest at St Joseph's Catholic Church in Bracebridge, and in his vocation, served in many parishes in the Peterborough diocese.
He played a significant role in the formation of faith of many children and youth in the Catholic school system. He was a loved priest and pastor by the many congregations that he served, and his quick wit and sense of humour were enjoyed by all. He was appointed parish priest of St.
Michael's, Cobourg in 1970. In 1972, he was granted a year's sabbatical and he joined his friends Christine and David Stewart, who were working as volunteers at an orphans' village in Honduras.
Shortly after their return to Cobourg in 1973, Tim, Christine and David founded the Help Honduras Foundation. It was later renamed Horizons of Friendship after programs had expanded to neighboring countries.
Visitation at the Cathedral of St. Peter-In-Chains from 5-8 p.m. on Sunday, June 10, 2018. Prayers for the Office of the Dead at 7 p.m. on Sunday. Celebration of life Mass will be held at the Cathedral of Saint Peter-in-Chains, 411 Reid St, Peterborough on Monday, June 11, 2018 at 11 a.m.
Interment to follow at St. Peter's Cemetery. Reception will be held at the Bishop Doyle Knights of Columbus Hall. Donations may be sent to Horizons of Friendship, 50 Covert St. P.O. Box 402, Cobourg, ON K9A 4L1 or made online: www.horizons.ca. (Arrangements entrusted to Duffus Funeral Home, 705-745-4612)
BRUCE COULTER 1927 - 2018
Bruce Coulter, 90 of Lennoxville Quebec, passed June 5, 2018.
Born November 19, 1927 in Toronto, Ontario to Ernest and Ruby Coulter. Beloved husband to Joyce (Brown) who has been by his side since they were married 64 years ago. Survived by his four children Susan (Bob), Butch (Vessela), Doug (Charlotte), and John (Natalie). Remembered as a loving grandfather by David, Erin (Kris), Quincy, Casey, Evan, Gordon, Amber, Nora, and greatgrandfather to Everly.
Bruce was an amazing man who lived a charmed life that touched many. He was a gentleman, accomplished athlete, teacher, husband, father, grandfather, great-grandfather and mentor to thousands of students. His most important accomplishments include: two-way player for the Montreal Alouettes (1948-57), head Coach of McGill University's football team (1958-61), Bishop's University's head football coach and athletics director (1962-1990), and inductee into the CFL hall of Fame with the class of 1997.
His Coaching record at Bishop's speaks for itself standing at 13780-2, CIAUs most successful coach upon retirement. Apart from the accolades, it was his commitment to his family, players, students and university life that exemplifies his legacy.
In 1991 the Bishop's University football stadium was renamed Coulter field in his honour and in 1995 the Vanier Cup established an award in his name to be given to the most outstanding defensive/ offensive player. Lover of music, especially blues, an accomplished ornithologist, and pretty good dancer, all will have their own unique memory of Bruce; however, his greatest legacy will be his commitment to his family and friends. A hero, icon, and legend he will be deeply missed and always remembered.
In lieu of flowers, memorial donations may be given to the Coulter Fund (in support of Bishop's Gaiters athletics) - Bishop's University, 2600 College St., Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, J1M 1Z7 or the MAB-Mackay Rehabilitation Centre (www.mabmackay.ca) would be appreciated. A celebration of Bruce's life will be held at Bishop's University on Friday, August 24, more details will follow.
DOROTHY PHILIPPA DALY
Dorothy Philippa Daly, RN, (born September 28, 1944) died unexpectedly on Thursday, May 31, 2018. She was predeceased by her parents, Prof. Philip B.
Hughes, PEng; and Dr. Kathleen M. Hughes, MD; and her siblings, Dr. Vincent J.
Hughes, MD FRCP; and Peter H. Hughes. She is survived by her loving husband of 47 years, Peter, and her children, Michael Philip and Kathleen Mary, and her siblings Dr. Sheila K. Doyle, MD; George V. Hughes; and Mary B.
Hughes, RN.
Mass of Christian Burial will be on Thursday, June 14 at 10:00 a.m. at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Church, 78 Clifton Rd.
Toronto - one block west of Mt. Pleasant Rd. on St. Clair Ave. E. A reception will follow in the church hall. Interment of her cremated remains will follow at a later date in the Hughes family plot at Mt. Hope Cemetery.
MAXIME VOISARD DUCHARME
It is with great sadness that we announce the passing of Maxime Voisard Ducharme ("Popa Max"), who peacefully passed away at home on June 3, 2018, at 87 years of age. Max was a beloved father to his two children, Jason Ducharme and Roxane Graham; proud grandfather of Darcy, Gavin, Rachael, Michael and Sarah; and great-grandfather to Venice and Vienna.
Max was born in Sudbury in 1931 and moved to Toronto to pursue his love of design. He graduated from the Ontario College of Art in 1958, earning an Eaton design scholarship. He joined Phillips Electronics in 1959 and quickly assumed the role of Chief of Design. In 1960 Max designed the "Bean Radio" which was a commercial success, it won international awards, and was one of the last Canadian-designed and manufactured transistor radios.
It is difficult to describe the type of man that Max was - he was one of a kind. He was someone to count on, and he showed us all how to love, laugh, innovate, be entrepreneurial, survive in the woods, and never conform to popular wisdoms. He would lecture anyone who'd listen about design, while at the same time teaching about love and respect. He was an accomplished musician; playing the piano, guitar, autoharp, clarinet, tambourine, harmonica, kazoo and vocals - often all at the same time. He had many lifelong friends. He was truly an example of how to live life to its fullest.
In accordance with Max's wishes, a private family interment will take place in Sudbury at a later date. Max will be lovingly remembered and deeply missed.
We love you Max.
MARGARET M. ENGEL
Passed away peacefully at the age of 89, on Sunday, June 3, 2018, with family by her side.
Beloved wife of the late Robert Engel (2006). Loving mother of John (Emily) and Jeff (Julie). Cherished grandmother of James and Liam.
Visitation will be held at Forest Grove United Church, 43 Forest Grove Drive, North York, on Friday, June 22nd from 10 a.m. until the time of the Funeral Service at 11 a.m.
Reception to follow immediately after service.
Private family Interment.
Donations may be made to Shepherd Lodge, (www.shepherdvillage.org).
Condolences at www.rskane.ca.
ROSE FARBER
Peacefully and with her children at her side on Monday, June 4 2018 at her home. Beloved wife of Harry Farber z"l for over 50 years. Loving mother and mother-in-law to Bernard and Evelyn, Esther and Jonathan Goodman, Tammy Farber and Mitch Lackie. Devoted and most loved Bubbie of Jonathan and Carly, Noah and Arielle, Shale, Aaron, Ilan, Matthew and Chaya Sara, Arielle, Carly, Emily and Samantha, and greatgrandmother to Gavi, Nate, Samuel, Harry, Orly and Avigayil.
She will be sadly missed by her family, her friends, and her loving and devoted caregivers, Lina, Cynthia and Grace who all saw and learned from her incredible strength and courage. Special thanks to Dr. Ellen Warner and her team and to Dr. Jack Sandler and the entire palliative care team.
Service was held at Benjamin's Park Memorial Chapel, 2401 Steeles Avenue West on Wednesday, June 6, 2018 at 2:30 p.m. Interment took place in the Adath Israel Synagogue section of Pardes Shalom Cemetery. Shiva at 66 Theodore Place, Thornhill.
Memorial donations may be made to Sunnybrook FoundationPYNK: Breast Cancer Program for Young Women 416-480-4483.
EMMI HARBECKE
Grief is just love that doesn't know where to go. On June 3, 2018 the best "NANA" ever to Jessica, Joshua, Skylar, Jacob, and Brooklyn passed away peacefully.
She is survived by her loving husband of 61 years, Lothar (Lou) Harbecke; her daughters, Diane Harbecke-Rushton and Connie Kennedy; and her son-in-law, Jeff Rushton (who was more like a son to her); and predeceased by her four sisters. She is also survived by relatives in Germany.
Emmi met Lothar, the love of her life, at the local swim club in Germany. After they married they took their long journey across the sea, by boat, to Canada ultimately settling in Woodstock, Ontario.
Emmi loved spending time with her family and her many close friends. We will remember her for her ability to be our weather network. She would always call us to warn us about the coming weather. She cared about those she loved worrying for the entire family even if there was nothing to worry about.
Her number one passion was seeing her grandchildren.
FaceTiming with them, following them on Facebook.cooking or baking their favourites (dumplings.sauerbraten.
bundt cake.butter creme torte.just to name a few cooking highlights). She enjoyed her many summers at Wakomata Lake where she cottaged for over 35 years. Emmi was always dressed for a magazine cover no matter where she was going or who she was visiting.
A time to celebrate Emmi's life will take place at South Gate Centre in Woodstock at a later date to be announced. Cremation has taken place. Interment will take place at the Hillview Cemetery Columbarium.
As an expression to celebrate Emmi's life, a donation to Coast to Coast Against Cancer (www.ctcacf.org) would be her chosen charity. All proceeds going to children with cancer, a foundation she truly loved and supported. Donation may also be arranged through the Brock and Visser Funeral Home, Woodstock, ON, 519-5390004. Personal condolences at www.brockandvisser.com.
JOHN EDWARD INGLIS M.D. May 19, 1937 - June 3, 2018
Jack passed away peacefully after a brief and valiant battle with pancreatic cancer. Predeceased by his first wife of 28 years, Diane (nee Richey), and his older brother, Rex. He leaves his cherished daughters, Mardi (Tony Grant) and Corrie (John Colangelo); and his three adoring grandsons, Connor Grant and Ben and Owen Colangelo. Jack also leaves his caring sister, Kathy Sammy; and his loving wife of thirteen years, Irene Edgar; her four daughters, and their families.
He will be sadly missed by his nieces and nephews, John and Connie Allardyce, Lynn and Pete McAdam, Michael and Julie Inglis, and Julian and Joy Sammy and their families.
Jack attended a one-room schoolhouse near Rockwood, Ontario and went on to graduate from the University of Toronto, School of Medicine in 1962. He was a proud member of the Sigma Chi Fraternity. Jack was a highly respected and devoted family physician in Brampton for 40 years. Jack delivered more than 600 babies, made hundreds of house calls and performed countless rounds at Peel Memorial Hospital during his rewarding career. Jack was an avid gardener, talented artist, competitive bridge player and longtime member of Caledon Ski Club. He loved summering in Muskoka and travelling the world with his best friend, Dr. Erik Braaten. Jack will be greatly missed and never forgotten.
Family and friends will be received at Meadowvale Cemetery, Cremation and Funeral Centres, 7732 Mavis Road in Brampton on Sunday, June 10, 2018. Visitation will begin at 10 am followed by a celebration of Jack's life at 11:30 a.m. A luncheon will be served after the service. A private interment will follow at 2:30 p.m.
Another celebration of Jack's life will be held at the St. Catharines Golf and Country Club, 70 Westchester Crescent, St. Catharines on Tuesday, June 12, 2018. Visitation will begin at 11 a.m. followed by a luncheon.
In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to the Canadian Cancer Society.
VIVIAN JANES (Nee Hassa l l ) July 24, 1924 May 31, 2018
Peacefully, at Bridgepoint Hospital in Toronto, following complications during her enthusiastic and determined rehabilitation from a fall in early April.
Vivian was married for 61 years to Hugh, the love of her life, who passed away in 2007. Together they enjoyed a well-travelled life as he followed his Royal Canadian Air Force career, living for many years in Ottawa but also Newport Pagnell in Buckinghamshire, UK, Winnipeg and North Bay, later retiring to their cottage on Lake Waseosa near Huntsville.
A much loved mom and Nana, she will be greatly missed by sons, Douglas and Robert; grandchildren, Daniela (Matt), Matthew (Yara), Andrea (Rob), and Adam (Kristen); greatgrandchildren, Ella, William, Adam, and Alice; sister, Carol (Doug); numerous nieces and nephews; and many friends.
She was predeceased by sisters, Mildred and Joan; daughters-inlaw, Ineke and Judith; and greatgranddaughter, Elyssa.
A kind, humorous, and capable woman, Viv was always brimming with style and grace. She was equally confident enjoying the moment whether hosting an event at the Officers' Mess or a dinner party, supervising staff at the Federal Taxation Centre, teaching grandchildren to cook, swim or drive, walking the beaches of Florida, Portugal or Cuba or the streets of Vienna (her favourite city in Europe), or finding the perfect gift. She approached all things in life with openness and joy.
The family would like to thank the staff at the Amica Balmoral retirement residence where she lived for the past four years and continued to share her zest for life. We wish to extend a special thank you to Vivian's physicians at St. Michael's Hospital, Dr. William Sullivan and Dr. Beth Abramson, for their exceptional and compassionate care.
A Celebration of Life will be held at the Humphrey Funeral Home A.W. Miles - Newbigging Chapel, 1403 Bayview Avenue (south of Davisville Avenue) on Friday, June 15th, at 11:00 a.m. At Vivian's request, bright colours are encouraged. In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to a charity of your choice. Condolences, photographs and memories may be forwarded through humphreymilesnewbigging.com.
ELSPETH AILEEN JOHNSON
Peacefully on June 1, 2018 after a short illness in her 94th year.
Elspeth was predeceased by her beloved husband, J. Duncan Johnson; and her parents, Robert and Hazel Abbey.
A memorial service to celebrate the life of Elspeth will be held in the chapel of the Morley Bedford Funeral Home, 159 Eglinton Avenue West (2 lights west of Yonge St.) on Wednesday, June 27th at 2 p.m. A reception will follow in the Park Room.
Cremation has taken place, interment Belleville Cemetery.
MICHAEL ARTHUR JORDAN August 1951 - May 2018
With profound sadness, we share the passing of Michael Arthur Jordan on May 3, 2018 in Vancouver. Michael was a devoted family man, loyal friend, outdoor enthusiast, and dedicated environmental engineer. Known for his personable nature, sharp intellect, and unique sense of humour, he was a genuine character who tackled everything in life with drive and determination. He was an avid commuting cyclist, a keen outrigger and marathon canoeist, and a skilled home renovator.
Michael held a special spot in his heart for BC's Peace River country where he was raised. After graduating from the University of British Columbia with a BSc in Bio-Resource Engineering, he made Vancouver his home and worked with BC Hydro and the Greater Vancouver Regional District before joining the forest industry. In his 29 years with Canfor, Michael's efforts had wide reaching impacts. From developing and implementing Environment Management Systems for Canfor's sawmills to his extensive work with provincial and federal governments to develop effective, yet practical, environmental and energy policies and regulations, Michael's presence made a positive difference. Michael was a trusted mentor to people within Canfor, industry, and government, sharing his knowledge with many over the years.
He will be forever missed by his wife, Ann; children, Robbie and Rennie; parents, Bob and Bunty; brothers, Peter and Paul (Anna); extended family, many friends, and colleagues. We are grateful to those at the BC Cancer Agency and Vancouver General Hospital for their exceptional care. If desired, memorial donations may be made to the BC Cancer Foundation. Visit www.mbfunerals.com to send a personal condolence.
MARY MADELEINE JOYCE (nee Sedgewick) 1919 - 2018
In her 100th year, Mary Joyce passed away peacefully in her own home on Saturday, June 2, 2018.
Mary was predeceased by her husband, Walter, and is survived by her children, Sheila Smolkin (the late Bob), Margaret Joyce, Tom Joyce (Joan) and Doug Joyce (Suze); fifteen grandchildren; seventeen greatgrandchildren; and two greatgreat-grandchildren.
Most of Mary's married life was spent in Ottawa where she was an active member of Glebe-St. James United Church. She moved back to Toronto 25 years ago where many of her volunteer activities centered around her membership at The Donway Covenant United Church.
Her life was enriched by constant reading, taking a variety of study classes, travel and time spent at the family cottage at Golden Lake.
A memorial service will take place for family and friends at The Donway Covenant Church, 230 The Donway West, Don Mills on Tuesday, June 19th at 1:00 p.m. If desired, the family asks that donations in her memory be made to a charity of your choice. Condolences, photographs and memories may be forwarded through www.humphreymilesnewbigging.com.
Mary will be remembered by her family and friends as a spunky, strong, independent woman, a woman to be greatly admired and emulated.
HUBERT KNAPP P.Eng.
Peacefully after a short illness on Sunday, June 3, 2018 at the age of 92.
Predeceased by his dearly loved wife of 51 years, June (2007). He is survived by his children, Stephen (Kimberley), Alison (George), and Craig (Diane); grandchildren, Matthew (Jennica), Sarah, Meghan, Allison, and Caroline; and greatgrandchild, Spencer. Bert was predeceased by his brothers, Bob and Roy.
Born and raised in London, England where he was an avid oarsman in 8-man crews on the Thames, Bert earned an Electrical Engineering degree and immigrated to Toronto in 1952. He joined Toronto Hydro and worked on many interesting projects including the conception and construction of Toronto's first steam distribution plant that served major hospitals and Toronto City Hall. He retired from Toronto Hydro as Assistant General Manager in 1990 after more than 35 years of service. Bert had a passion for sailing and spent many happy days on Lake Ontario sailing out of the Queen City and Bluffers Park Yacht Clubs.
He will be greatly missed.
A private family service has taken place.
KERRY LAMBIE
Peacefully, with his family by his side, on Wednesday, June 6, 2018, at Chartwell Brant Centre Long Term Residence, Burlington, at the age of 79. Beloved husband of Beverley for 58 years. Cherished father of Tobin (Anne) and Laurie (John Pierre Taraso). Adored grandfather of Meghan, Iain, Scott, Courtney (Benoit), Dylan, Ashley, Heather, Laura and great-grandfather of Samuel.
Kerry was born in Kirkland Lake, Ontario, and he started his lengthy career in newspapers as a sports reporter at the Northern Daily News in the community.
Stops would be made at several other newspapers as he eventually climbed the ranks to executive vice-president and chief operating officer (North America) of Thomson Newspapers Corp.
A long-time passion of Kerry was painting and after being sidetracked by the newspaper business for 35 years, he retired and started his own studio, largely focusing on landscapes from Ontario's Northland.
While the newspaper business had brought Kerry to the Toronto area, his heart had remained firmly tied to the North. He visited the Temagami area annually and called the region "almost never pretty but always beautiful."
He painted at his Mississauga-based art studio for 20 years and his work is hanging in homes and businesses in Canada and other countries, including the U.S. and Australia.
Kerry valued time with his family as it brought him lots of joy and entertainment. He was regularly seen at hockey rinks, soccer fields, baseball diamonds, dance recitals and music concerts.
Salut! Friends may call at the Turner & Porter Peel Chapel, 2180 Hurontario St., Mississauga (Hwy.
10, N. of QEW) on Tuesday, June 12, 2018 from 9:30 a.m. followed by a Celebration of Life Service in the Chapel at 10:30 a.m. If desired, remembrances may be made to the Alzheimer Society.
Online condolences may be made through www.turnerporter.ca.
CHARLOTTE ANN LITTLE "Sally"
Peacefully at University Hospital, London, after a long battle with cancer on Tuesday, June 5, 2018, Charlotte Ann 'Sally' Little (nee Merwin) of London age 81. She will be missed by her husband, James Henry 'Kim' son, Ross and his wife, Dorothy of Oakville; grandchildren, Andrew and Katie; daughter, Mary and her husband, Richard-Yves Sitoski of Owen Sound, and her stepgrandson, Daniel; son, Michael and his wife, Susan of Oakville; and grandchildren, Marley, Miles, and Emily.
Predeceased by her mother, Anne Kedey Merwin; father, Andrew Charles Merwin; and brother, Jack Merwin. Sally also leaves behind her sisterin-law, Lynne; niece, Kathy; and nephew, Scott Merwin.
Sally spent her early years in Foleyet and Sudbury, Ontario.
She studied nursing at Toronto Western Hospital and McGill University. She was actively involved in her community including: as a member of the organizing committee of the program receiving Vietnamese refugees through St John the Evangelist Church, she herself personally hosted a large number of refugees; she was also a puppeteer with the Maycourt Marionettes and a counselor with the Contact Crisis Centre.
Her fondest times were those spent with her husband and family skiing at Moose Manor and Moose Lookout atop Blue Mountain, in the outdoors in Northern Ontario, sailing the North Channel, and exploring the high Arctic. She cherished elegant, formal family gettogethers which were coloured with her unique brand of whimsy.
Visitation will be Sunday, June 10, from 2 - 4 p.m. at Harris Funeral Home. The funeral will be held Monday, June 11, 12:00 noon at the Church of St John the Evangelist, London. Memorial donations may be made to St John the Evangelist Endowment Fund or Lakefield College School Foundation.
NANCY ISOBEL LYNN (nee Baker)
Passed away peacefully May 27, 2018, at 97 years of age. Daughter of the late George Alfred Baker, and the late Elsie Lillian Cockshutt Baker. She is survived by her brother, Donald Baker (Evelyn); children, Fraser (Amy), Langton (Carol), and Kathryn Lynn; grandchildren, Erika Keel (Callaway), Alexander, Baker, Jackson, James, Elise, and Sarah Lynn; nieces and nephews, Alan Wainwright (Pauline), Daphne and Debbie Seagram (Carl), Jackie Loach (Ken); grand-nieces and nephews, Jennifer, Kim, Susan, David, Megan, Alana, Brittne, Justin, and Rachel. She was predeceased by her husband, James Fraser Lynn; her son, Charly Lynn (Sandra); her sister, Mary Seagram (David); her brothers, Harvey and Langton Baker (Margaret); her sisters-inlaw, Shirley Lynn and Barbara Kihlman (Bengt); and her niece, Elizabeth Kihlman.
Born and raised in Toronto, she was educated at BSS, Branksome Hall, Elmwood, and Havergal College prior to university. During WWII, she joined the WRCNS and was assigned to the British Admiralty's Naval Intelligence Division. She performed decoding work for the NID in Bletchley Park, England for the duration of the war. After the war, Nancy enrolled at McGill University and received a degree in Physiotherapy, which she practiced at Toronto General Hospital during the late 1940s and early 1950s.
A memorial service will be held at noon on Saturday, July 28th at Christ Church, in Roches Point, Ontario, with a reception to follow.
In lieu of flowers, donations may be made by cheque to the church that she attended since childhood: Christ Church, 12 Turner St., PO Box 1066, Roches Point, Ontario L0E 1P0; or to a charity of your choice. For more information, please visit her online obituary where you may also leave a note of condolences at: www.mwbeckerfuneralhome.com.
DEATHS ELIZABETH JEAN McEWAN May 14, 1924 - June 6, 2018 Peacefully, on Wednesday, June 6, 2018, at the Village of Humber Heights, at the age of 94. Beloved wife of the late James G.
McEwan. Cherished mother of Janice McEwan, Mardine Steiner, Catherine McEwan and the late Dr. Brian McEwan. Adored grandmother of Jessica (Dave), Tristan (Catherine) and Tara.
Loving Great Grandmother to Quinn, Seren, Lily and Emrick.
Friends may call at the Turner & Porter Yorke Chapel, 2357 Bloor St. W., at Windermere, east of the Jane subway, on Monday, June 25, 2018 from 7 - 9 p.m. Funeral service will be held at Royal York Rd. United Church, 851 Royal York Rd., Etobicoke, on Tuesday, June 26, 2018 at 11 a.m. If desired, remembrances may be made to the Village of Humber Heights or Royal York Rd. United Church.
Online condolences may be made through www.turnerporter.ca.
DAVID W. McFADDEN
October 11, 1940 - June 6, 2018
Beloved and loving father of Jennifer; predeceased by loved daughter, Alison.
Deeply loved brother of Jack McFadden. Adored husband of Merlin Homer. Grandfather of Amy, Chloe, and Benny, whose names are the anagram of his Griffin nominated book, Be Calm Honey. Great-grandfather of newborn, Lila.
Succinctly captured in words by fellow poet and Hamiltonian Gary Barwin: A larger-than-life man and writer who was at the same time so exactly the size of life.
Funeral service will be held at St. Anne's Anglican Church, 270 Gladstone Avenue, Toronto, 11 am, June 16, 2018.
Please honour David's memory with a donation either to St. Anne's Anglican Church, or Toronto Grace Health Centre, Palliative Care Unit, both of which offered extraordinary sanctuary to David in his final illnesses.
Arrangements entrusted to the G.H. Hogle Funeral Home.
NANCY LOUISE McFARLANE (nee Paterson)
October 10, 1924June 3, 2018
Slipped away peacefully at cocktail time on a beautiful day. Predeceased by her loving husband, Paul A.
McFarlane, Jr. in 1973 and by Nancy Louise her infant daughter. She was born in Fort William, the fifth of six children, to the late Senator Norman McLeod Paterson and Eleanor Macdonald.
Dearly loved by her children, Louise (John Moses), Paul (Carol McFarlane), and Margot (Peter Hall); beloved Gran to her eight grandchildren, Katie, Margot, Peter, Jane, Natalie, Krista, Nicholas and William.
Also loved by her nine greatgrandchildren, Jack, Libby, Brylan, Sadie, Alexandra, Victoria, Spencer, Pierce and Aurora.
Nancy was a remarkable woman, sharp and intelligent who always enjoyed engaging in lively conversation. She had a determination and love for her family that was unsurpassed, at the same time, was encouraging and loving to all who were fortunate enough to know her.
At her request a private family service was held. In lieu of flowers, please make donations to the charity of your choice.
GLEN ALEXANDER PATTERSON September 23, 1921 May 15, 2018
Glen Alexander Patterson, 96, died May 15th with family at his side. He is survived by his sister, Jean Edwards, of Toronto; son, Dennis, (Evelyn) Bruce, George, Jessica and Alexander; son Bruce, (Ilse) Kate, Rose, Lena; and daughter, Sheila, (Brian) Lewis, Isobel, Sally; and 5 great-grandchildren.
His was a life well lived.
He was born in Calgary to a musical and gardening family. It was on a boys band trip to play at the Haywood Bandstand in the West End that Glen first laid eyes on Vancouver. It was love at first sight, and his passion for it never diminished. He graduated in Commerce from U of A and then served with the Royal Canadian Air Force training pilots in the Commonwealth Air Training Plan.
After the war, he and his high school sweetheart, Isobel Farr, eloped to Vancouver. When Glen got a job in the Kananaskis, lodging was scarce so they took over an abandoned prospector's cabin and while Glen cruised timber, Isobel fended off the bears. What bliss! Back to Vancouver, Isobel worked to support Glen when he took a second degree in Forestry graduating from UBC in 1947. Jobs were scarce then and they were thrilled when Glen was hired by Canadian Forest Products in the Nimpkish Valley on Vancouver Island as a fire warden and later as a forester.
Living in isolation in remote Woss Camp, they raised 3 children.
Home was an un-insulated, wood stove heated bunkhouse, sensibly sited on gravel.
Ever the gardener, Glen packed swamp soil on his back to establish a garden that was their pride and joy. His work talents were recognized and he was promoted to management at Grande Prairie, Alberta and in the last years of his career to his beloved Vancouver as VP Canfor.
His retirement was not retiring.
He threw himself at exotic travel often in the pursuit of rare plants.
He created two outstanding gardens, one at Pilot House Rd.
in West Vancouver and his piece de resistance in Coal Harbour, a celebrated rooftop garden that defied gardening norms. Glen had a zeal for life and his enthusiasm was unmeasured. If you asked after Glen, his reply would invariably be "Never better".
Among his many passions; nature, travel, rare plants, the mountains, politics, the Internet, photography, fitness, investing, conifers, his Iphone, pussycats, collecting Indigenous West Coast Art, and his grandchildren. He adored his final home at Tapestry, UBC. He is remembered for his courage and his steadfast commitment to his independence (how about 5 times per week personal training sessions until right before his death!).
His curiosity and intellect were prodigious and his many informed opinions were staunchly defended. He was serially social, though his black cloud was the tragic loss of Isobel in 1971.
Our Dad, Brother, Grandpa, GreatGrandpa, Father-in-law, Friend, Go well to the Great Beyond.
DEANNA ELIZABETH PERSCHBACHER (nee Wood) October 17, 1940 - June 6, 2018
Deanna, of Mississauga, born in Stratford, Ontario, passed away peacefully with her family by her side. Loving wife of Marvin for 55 years. Devoted mother to Kristina and Susanne and son-in-law, Mark. Cherished grandmother to Joakim, Xavier, Anya, and Daphne. Survived by brother, Doug; and predeceased by sister, Gloria; and brother, Gordon.
Deanna graduated from the University of Guelph with her Honours degree in Home Economics. Later, she pursued continued studies at the University of Toronto Mississauga to teach French. She was a dedicated and enthusiastic teacher who inspired students with creative and imaginative programming.
Four years teaching at the Canadian Airforce Base in Zweibrucken, Germany with Marvin fostered innumerable travel adventures and longterm friendships. During her retirement she travelled extensively with Marvin and pursued many interests including bridge, golf, art and gardening. She will be missed by the many friends with whom she shared these passions.
Deanna was an inspiration. As a mother and grandmother she was committed to creating fun, enrichment and tradition. She was a gracious and welcoming presence to everyone she met and loved entertaining friends and family. She added beauty and balance with her personal touch.
We will miss her strength and grace.
Celebration of life Saturday, June 16, 2018 at Turner and Porter: 2180 Hurontario Street, Mississauga.
Welcome at 10:00 a.m.; service at 11:00 a.m.; reception to follow.
PHYLLIS IRENE PHELAN (nee Britten) January 22, 1922, Toronto June 3, 2018, Vancouver
It is with great sadness we announce the passing of our mother, Phyllis Phelan, at the age of 96. She was a warm, smart, loving, and entirely selfless woman. She came of age during World War II and married Claude (d. 2005), an exploration mining engineer. They travelled the world together, expanding their horizons, living in Western Canada, the U.S., the West Indies, South America, North Africa, Ethiopia and Switzerland.
She was adventurous, refined and glamorous but always guided by her strong personal priorities of kindness and respect for others.
Regardless of where she lived she bravely stood up for the underdog by volunteering in the community, from founding a school in Cochabamba, Bolivia to distributing food from the tarmac in Addis Abba, Ethiopia.
Phyllis loved reading, crossword puzzles and history. With no time for pretense or ego, Phyllis could be counted on to give expert, practical advice in any situation (often with humour, and whether solicited or not). She was insightful, kind and accepting of others from all walks of life and made special connections with doctors, nurses, and caregivers in her later years.
Mummy was a role model to all of us left behind and will be so missed by her three daughters, who hope to become an extension of her grace and generosity: Nancy (Jim Shea), Deborah (Charles Stoody) and Kerry (Louis O'Dea); her grandchildren, James, Kelley (d. 2015) and Connor Shea, Kathleen (Mike Wylie), Marianne and Alison Stoody (Fajer Abu Zayed), Ellen, Ciara, Molly and James O'Dea; and three greatgranddaughters, Madeline, Amelia, and Summer. She is also survived by sister, Lorraine Potter, Toronto; and sister-in-law, Patricia Rudd, Toronto.
Despite the painful loss she leaves in her wake precious memories of a life well lived and her rich legacy will endure. She taught us all how to live and even how to die.
We are grateful for the care, love and support from the Kiwanis Manor staff and residents. Her passing was gratefully supervised with comfort and care by Dr.
Sugar and the Home Care Nurses of West Vancouver.
A private memorial will be held for family.
JANE JONES REID March 2, 1934 - February 25, 2018
A celebration of Jane's life will be held at St. Paul's Anglican Church, 12 Pine Street, Brockville, Ontario on Friday, June 15, 2018 at 2 p.m., with a reception to follow. Her husband, John Reid, daughters, Susan (Andrew Mizen), Janet (Andrew Dayneka) and Barbara (Bob Tilka) and all the grandchildren, (Alex (Kirk Hayes), Jillian and Stephen Dayneka, Max and Duncan Tilka, and Sara and Jamie Mizen) hope that neighbours, friends and family will be able to join them in this celebration. Arrangements are entrusted to the Irvine Funeral Home and Chapel, 4 James St.
E., Brockville. Condolences and donations may be left online at www.irvinememorial.com.
JAMES RYDER "Jim"
Born in Ardboe, County Tyrone, Ireland, died peacefully at his home in Ballantrae, Ontario, on June 2, 2018 at the age of 83.
A nuclear physicist, he studied at Queen's University Belfast, and had a career in nuclear power, spanning 40 years in the UK and Canada. He worked for Ontario Hydro/Ontario Power Generation, and was Station Manager at Pickering Nuclear and Site Vice President at Bruce Nuclear.
In his retirement years, he enjoyed travelling to Spain and Ireland, and his cottage. He was an avid golfer and had a zest for life that he shared generously with family and friends.
Predeceased by his wife, Ann Carmel (Breen) of Downpatrick, Ireland. Survived by son, Shane (Denise) of Pickering; and daughter, Gráinne (Kieran) of Waterloo; grandchildren, Róisín (Grant) of Addison, Texas, Seamus (Sarah) of Halifax, Nova Scotia; sister, Maureen Haire of Peterborough, England; and his companion, Erika Rummel.
Visitors are welcome to O'Neill Funeral Home, 6324 Main Street, Stouffville, 905-642-2855 for visitation on Monday, June 11, 2018 from 2-4 and 6-8 p.m.
Funeral Mass will be celebrated on Tuesday, June 12, 2018 at 10:30 a.m. in St. Mark's Roman Catholic Church, 345 Glad Park Avenue, Stouffville. Interment to follow at Christ the King Cemetery.
In lieu of flowers, memorial donations may be made to Southlake Regional Health Center Foundation or the Chalice Fund.
Online condolences may be shared at www.arbormemorial. ca/en/oneill.
DIANE STEWART
Peacefully at home after a lengthy illness on Wednesday, June 6, 2018, Diane Yvonne Stewart, BScN, MScN (Admin) of London. Daughter of the late John and Yvonne Stewart of Chatham and dear sister of Dr. J.D. Stewart of Kitchener.
Diane graduated from Victoria Hospital School of Nursing, 1953. Her Masters in Nursing Administration at Western, 1967, led to a successful career in this field. For 30 years, she was Executive Vice President at University Hospital, which she helped to plan and build. As an administrator, she treated everyone equally, with dignity and respect.
Diane enjoyed her home, and cottage time in Grand Bend with her brother, John. She also loved her Yorkshire Terriers. She will be fondly remembered as a loyal and gracious friend.
The funeral service will be conducted at St. Paul's Cathedral, 472 Richmond St. at Queens Ave., London on Thursday, June 14 at 11 a.m. Reception to follow.
Interment Sherman Cemetery, Thamesville. Memorial donations to the Diane Y. Stewart Fund directed to London Community Foundation would be appreciated.
www.HarrisFuneralHome.ca
EDITH JANE STREET
Passed away in the early hours of Friday, June 1, 2018 in her 95th year. Born November 5, 1923 in Toronto to Henry and Edith Tingey, she was predeceased by her brother, William Tingey (Shirley); sister, Lily Bowman (Harvey); husband, James Street; son, David Street; son-in-law, Terry Burke; and brother-in-law, William Street (Anne). She is survived by her children, Carol Street, Patricia Street (Rick Liliani) and John Street; and by her much loved grandchildren, Kevin Burke (Denise Figueiredo), Emily Burke (Ben MacPherson), Sean Liliani, Alison Liliani (Matt Cooper) and Paul Liliani (Nicole Tetreault); as well as her great-grandchildren, Joshua and Serena Burke. She also leaves nieces and nephews in the Toronto area, California and Denmark. Edie's was a long and well lived life in which her family was always her priority.
Thank you to all the friendly and caring staff at The Grenadier Retirement Home. A Memorial gathering will be held at Turner & Porter Yorke Chapel, 2357 Bloor St.
W., east of the Jane subway, on Wednesday, June 20, 2018, from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
LYN ERIC TURNER
With great sadness, we announce the passing of Lyn Eric Turner, 72, of Fort Myers Beach, Florida. Lyn died peacefully on June 3, 2018, with his daughters by his side, after a brave struggle with pulmonary fibrosis. He will be greatly missed by Dawne Keith (Geoff), Heidi Lorenz (Kirk), and Jill Friesen (Randy); his grandchildren, Jack, Matthew, Danny, Jeremy and Samantha; and by many dear friends at home and abroad.
He was predeceased by his parents, Fred and Kay Turner; his brother, Terry Turner; and his sister, Leigh Hobson. We would like to extend a special thank you to John Marsden and Mark Forester for their immeasurable kindness and support during this very difficult time.
In keeping with Lyn's wishes, there will be no funeral service. Donations may be made in memory of Lyn to the ASPCA.
DIANA FRANCIS MARY WATSON October 25, 1931 May 25, 2018
Diana Francis Mary (Foote) Watson, 86, passed away suddenly at her home, surrounded by the garden and woods she loved, on May 25, 2018.
Mary was born in Markham, Ontario, to Ann (Bradley) and Samuel Foote, and grew up along the banks of the Don River. An active girl who loved exploring the outdoors, she often returned home with twigs and leaves tangled in her curls to the chagrin of her mother, who was trying to raise a lady. Mary became an accomplished artist, skilled at drawing and painting. Her images of flowers, woodlands and animals were beautifully rendered in water-colour, pastels and pencil. She later earned two degrees in Art and Art History from York University.
During her years working at Connaught labs in Toronto, and later through personal studies of her favourite hummingbird moths and ornithology, she always pushed her intellectual and artistic boundaries.
Mary and Ted Watson married in 1957 in Penetanguishene. The couple embarked on life travelling aboard their boat named "The Seven Bones" through the Trent Severn waterways and Georgian Bay. Following the birth of their sons, they decided to settle in King Township, on the property that became known as "Hemlock Hill." This was the home where Mary raised her sons, established extensive perennial gardens, entertained, and became a dear friend to many who surrounded her. She was truly a lady.
She will be greatly missed by her sister, Joyce (Foote) Fearnside; her sons, James (Marilyn) Watson and Ian (Michelle) Watson; her grandchildren, Bethany, Laura, Jordan, Samantha, Max, and Simone; her nieces, Susan Scholefield (Fearnside), Beth Hayes (Fearnside), and Melanie Foote; and her longtime friend and neighbour, Elaine. Mary was predeceased by her brother, Samuel Beverly Foote; husband, George Edward (Ted) Watson; and nephew, Mark Foote.
A gathering to celebrate Mary's life will be held on Sunday, June 10th, from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at her home. In lieu of flowers, donations to Parkinson Canada would be greatly appreciated.
CHRISTOPHER G. C. WILSON
Died May 28, 2018 at Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY after a short illness. He was born in Ottawa in 1949 and grew up in Montreal and Ottawa. He attended Glendon College and Ryerson University where he graduated with a degree in Photographic Arts majoring in Film. He was a man of dedication and compassion who used his creative talents and communication skills for the betterment of the ill and disadvantaged. At a young age, he led a battle between low income tenants and their landlord which led to the formation of one of the first non-profit housing co-ops in Toronto. He went on to produce award-winning documentaries and worked as an Assistant Director for TV and feature films. He returned to the issue of affordable housing as a co-op housing developer, and then headed the drive to create the Toronto Islands Residential Trust, becoming its first Manager.
He led national government relations campaigns for the Cooperative Housing Federation of Canada. His advocacy firm Civica Inc. served many health charities and co-operatives. He was a member of the multistakeholder committee whose groundbreaking achievement was the creation of Canada's Air Quality Management System. Christopher was a humanitarian who gave voluntary time to Project Life War Orphans Program and to the Global Nuclear Awareness Program. In his professional and humanitarian work, he had the knack for persuading those with opposing views to find what they had in common. He was a humble and caring friend within his family and community.
He was predeceased by his parents, W.A. and Marion Wilson of Ottawa. He is survived by his wife, Deborah Wilson; son, Samuel; sisters, Diana, Alexandra (Paul-Andre Baril), Frederica; brother, Mark; Deborah's mother, Mary Wolfe; her sisters, Ruth and Naomi; brother, Lewis; as well as nine nieces and nephews.
A private ceremony and burial were held in Waterport, NY. In lieu of flowers, donations to World Life Institute would be appreciated: Project Life War Orphans http:// projectlife-wli.org or the Center of Excellence https://www.
globalnuclearawareness.org/ donations
J. ARTHUR WYNN Q.C.
Peacefully, with his daughters by his side, at his home in Newcastle, on Tuesday, June 5, 2018 at the age of 94. Beloved and loving husband of the late Celia Wynn for 62 years. Devoted and proud father of Francine Wynn, Emily Wynn and the late Marcia Biles. Missed by his treasured grandchildren, Chloe Fraser and Jessie, Bryony, and Rachel Biles; and son-in-law, Peter Biles. Dear brother of Geoffrey Wynn.
A funeral service will be held at St. George's Anglican Church, 250 Mill St S, Newcastle, on Tuesday, June 12, 2018 at 2 p.m. with visitation at the church starting at 1 p.m. Interment to follow at Bond Head Cemetery. In memory of Arthur, the family would appreciate donations to the Multiple Sclerosis Society. Online condolences may be made at www.newcastlefuneralhome.com
CHARLIE HOWARD May 22, 1942 - June 10, 2005
We miss you so Love, Di and your family
JOHN G. TEN BRUMMELER July 6, 1934 - June 9, 2010
Forever Loved and Missed Tipie, Christine, Susie, John, Richard, Charlie, Christopher, Andrew Matthew and Paige
MARK ROBERTS TINKER 1967 - 1998
Gone, but never forgotten Always in our hearts Jennifer, Scott, Keith and family

