Janine Metallic says that something magical happens when she hears the Mi'kmaq language spoken.
She may live in Montreal now, about 800 kilometres southwest from her home in the Listuguj First Nation on the Gaspe Peninsula, but the words carry her to that distant place.
"When I hear the language, it immediately brings me back home," said Metallic, a PhD student at McGill University. "The way we tell jokes, the way we tell stories, there's a whole world view embedded in those words. It's a different reflection of the world."
In 2011, Metallic partnered with McGill's linguistics department for a project on the Mi'kmaq language. Working with a small class, Metallic was able to guide students through the mechanics and subtleties of Mi'kmaq and, in return, they would help with efforts to revitalize the language in Listuguj - where the use of Mi'kmaq has been in a state of decline for decades.
The study and revitalization of indigenous languages is part of a conference beginning next Friday at Universite du Quebec a Montreal. The conference will host linguists from across the continent as they explore the nuts and bolts of how indigenous languages work, how we record them and how we might be able to preserve them.
"To ask a linguist what it might mean for (Canada) to lose an indigenous language, that's like asking a biologist what it might mean for the rain forest to disappear," said Richard Compton, the UQAM linguistics professor who's organizing the conference. "It's such a critical part of the vitality and culture of this country."
Compton is working on a dictionary that has compiled about 8,000 words in Kangiryuarmiut - a language used by indigenous people in Canada's remote northwest.
Metallic, 43, is one of the few people of her generation in Listuguj that learned to speak Mi'kmaq from her parents. By the 1970s, children in the Mi'kmaq territory were schooled off-reserve after a fire burned down the local school.
This contributed to an erosion of the language - one that started with the residential school system and other assimilationist policies - and it mirrored what was happening in reserves across Canada. "It was important for my family that if we were going to be schooled in English, we had to preserve our language," Metallic said. "Our household policy was Mi'kmaq only. The second we got off the school bus and entered our home, it was only Mi'kmaq.
"Other parents didn't all feel that way. They thought, 'You need English to succeed.' My parents had the attitude that, 'They can learn more than one language.' "These days, in Listuguj, Metallic's mother and her sister are teaching a new generation to speak the language of their ancestors. Though the efforts are community-based, McGill University's linguistics department lent some of its expertise to language immersion programs on the territory.
"What's important to emphasize here is it's really not linguists who 'save' languages. It's communities who do this," said Jessica Coon, a McGill University linguistics teacher who worked on the Listuguj project. "We can assist with existing efforts, we can share some of our research but, in Listuguj, there's a real willingness from the community to learn the language."
Among the most prominent obstacles contributing to the decline of aboriginal languages is the fact that as they continue to erode, it becomes increasingly difficult to practise them.
"If I want to learn Spanish, I can go to Mexico and be surrounded by it," said Coon, who specializes in Mayan dialects. "Whereas if you want to learn Mi'kmaq, there's nowhere you can go where you'd be forced to speak Mi'kmaq. ... So if you want to learn it, you have to really build a strategy, you have to go out and find speakers to converse with and that's not necessarily easy."
The other major hurdle is that implementing these programs is labour intensive and costly. In last week's budget, the federal government announced annual grants of $5 million to promote aboriginal languages, but some argue that doesn't go far enough.
Pam Palmater, a Mi'kmaq lawyer and academic, wrote in a blog post Wednesday that the real cost of reinvigorating Canada's 53 aboriginal languages could be in the billions.
In communities like Listuguj, however, it seems the efforts will continue with or without help from Ottawa. Metallic says that while many may believe there's no practical reason to learn Mi'kmaq - a language spoken by about 10,000 Canadians according to Statistics Canada - there's a yearning for people to reconnect with the dialect of their ancestors.
"People are establishing a link to the previous generations," said Metallic. "So many things in our history, our colonial past, disrupted that intergenerational transmission of language. It's hopeful to see people making that effort." ccurtis@postmedia.com Twitter.com/titocurtis
Credit: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF, FILES / In last week's budget, the federal government announced annual grants of $5 million to promote aboriginal languages.

