1 d) 96.9 per cent In Quebec and elsewhere, deaths linked to COVID-19 are overwhelmingly concentrated in the 60-plus age group. Known adult cases - which is to say, positive tests - are relatively evenly distributed by age. Reported deaths linked to COVID among Quebecers ages 30 and under: zero. 2 c) Pittsburgh Penguins In 2020, the Canadiens both missed the playoffs and made them, owing to the unique post-lockdown 24-team play-in format. In the summer the Habs upset the talent-laden Penguins in the Eastern Conference "qualifying round" before succumbing in the "first round" to the Philadelphia Flyers. 3 b) Bike paths The Côte-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough council scrapped the lanes in response to citizen complaints about the elimination of curbside parking. "We've disrupted an entire neighbourhood," city councillor Marvin Rotrand said, adding that "hardly anyone" was using the paths. 4 a) Réseau express métropolitain The transit system will link Montreal Central Station to Brossard, Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, Deux-Montagnes and, it was announced this month, Pointe-aux-Trembles. The Central Station-to-Brossard leg will be operational, if all goes as planned, in 2022. Give yourself half a point if you guessed Réseau électrique métropolitain, the system's original name. 5 a) Stéphane Aquin The Montreal native and Université de Montréal alumnus left the Smithsonian system in Washington to take over the MMFA, which dismissed Nathalie Bondil in July. Bondil had objected to the promotion of Mary-Dailey Desmarais as director of the curatorial division. Aquin pledged to North-Americanize the museum: "We are not a suburb of Paris." Bondil holds French and Canadian citizenship.
6 d) Moishe's The venerable steakhouse was supposed to move downtown to Victoria Square. The pandemic had other ideas. Lenny Lighter, son of founder Moishe Lighter, has promised that the restaurant will return. Moishe's was purchased in 2018 by the company that operates the chain La Cage. 7 b) Increase pay to orderlies more quickly "If I was able to redo one thing, I would have increased the wages of orderlies faster, even without the accord of the unions," the premier said, as the gravity of the nursing home crisis became apparent. Orderlies - many of whom did not report for duty - were paid between $20.55 and $22.35 an hour. Doctors, nurses and eventually the Armed Forces were forced to make up for the shortfall. 8 a) Louise Penny The Knowlton-based crime writer has set her latest mystery not in the fictional Townships municipality of Three Pines, but in Paris, where Inspector Armand Gamache of the Sûreté du Québec has no authority. "I learned more than I ever expected to know about a rare earth element called neodymium and its potentially sinister uses," reviewer Robert Croan commented in the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. 9 b) QCGN (short for Quebec Community Groups Network) The anglo activist group will presumably have a busy 2021 if the Legault government tables new legislation to strengthen French. Marlene Jennings, a former Liberal MP, had another four-letter affiliation in 2020 as a trustee of the EMSB - the English Montreal School Board. Before this she was executive director of the Montreal YMHA. 10 b) A downed pilot Molson was boating on Lake Massawippi on the morning of Sept. 12 when a small aircraft hit the water and went down quickly. Happily, the pilot managed to stay afloat. Post-rescue comment was limited. "Modesty has always been the Molson family's way of doing things," a Canadiens spokesman said. 11 b) Oil heating The TMR council was prepared to do its bit for global warming by approving the ban as of Jan. 1, 2025. Mayor Philippe Roy got cold feet. Montreal hopes to phase out heating oil in industrial and commercial buildings by 2025 and residential properties by 2030. Only a small fraction of homes are still heated by oil. 12 b) A $3.3-billion tramway project Quebec City Mayor Régis Labeaume had been pushing the 22-kilometre tramway system for a decade. BAPE, the environmental review board, contended that the proposal did not serve suburbs adequately and that a subway or light-rail system should have been considered. Labeaume called the report "distorted, biased and full of contradictions." 13 b) Falaise St-Jacques The 2.8-kilometre forested area between the cliffs (falaises) south of St-Jacques St. and the CN tracks and Highway 20 is slated to become a recreational park with a bicycle path. Protesters have noted the creation of the new "bande verte" will entail the cutting down of between 400 and 600 trees. 14 c) No one was elected Sorry, this is the mandatory trick question. After Alexandre Cusson withdrew from the race to replace Philippe Couillard, only Dominique Anglade was left. The MNA for the Saint-Henri-Sainte-Anne electoral district acceded to the post by acclamation. A former president of the Coalition Avenir Québec who became disaffected by the party's stance on immigration, Anglade is the first woman to lead the Liberals. 15 a) To abolish school boards Bill 40 replaced them, including the English Montreal School Board, with "service centres" comprising community representatives, staff members and parents. Court challenges restored the English school boards in the summer. "Early on Feb. 14" means early: The final vote in the National Assembly - 60 for and 35 against - was taken at 3:21 a.m. after Premier François Legault invoked closure. 16 a) A pipeline in British Columbia The proposed Coastal GasLink Pipeline, bringing crude oil from Dawson Creek, B.C., to the port town of Kitimat, crosses traditional territory of the Wet'suwet'en First Nation. The Mohawks of Kahnawake established a blockade in sympathy with the hereditary chiefs who were opposed to the project (the elected chiefs were in favour). The disruption to freight and passenger traffic lasted until early March. 17 d) Baking Portuguese tarts Quebec's personable director of public health has mixed standard medical advice with suggestions intended to preserve high spirits amid the pandemic. Born in Ste-Thérèse to parents from the Azores, Arruda turned "pasteis de nata" into a minor sensation. Not that baking was his only pastime. He was found fishing in Quebec City's Old Port.
18 a) Laurent Duvernay-Tardif The NFL lineman, a native of Mont-St-Hilaire, was one of five Sportspersons selected by the magazine. All were named in part for their "activist journeys" as well as their athletic performance. A medical doctor, Duvernay-Tardif opted out of the 2020 season to work on the COVID-19 front lines. That was after playing for the victorious Kansas City Chiefs in the Super Bowl. 19 c) A katana or Japanese sword The suspect, a 24-year-old man from Ste-Thérèse, north of Montreal, was dressed in what was described as "a medieval costume" on Halloween. Two people died. 20 c)
Turkeys A native species reintroduced in the 1970s after being hunted out of the province by 1909, Meleagris gallopavo has proliferated to the point of causing crop damage. There have been turkey sightings in Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie and even N.D.G. Mild winters might be to blame. 21 c) Lost time in a 2017 snowstorm On March 14 of that year a blizzard and a jackknifed tractor-trailer conspired to keep hundreds of drivers stuck for as long as 11 hours on Highway 13. Some slept in the cold, some abandoned their vehicles and walked home. A class-action lawsuit against the province proved successful. Compensation depends on how long people were stuck in their car. 22 d) Black Theatre Workshop Founded officially in June 1971 with a production of How Now Black Man, the company traces its roots a few years earlier to the Trinidad and Tobago Association. COVID has put the kibosh on live theatre in Montreal but BTW was in the news in December for being named the co-curating company for the English Theatre division of the National Arts Centre in Ottawa. 23 b) Je contribue "Some positions require experience or training in health and social services, but not all," reads the website. "In particular, that of the service assistant who performs general tasks such as cleaning, maintaining, storing the material and the equipment in use." 24 a) New England Revolution Qualifying for the playoffs for the first time since 2016 - in part owing to the expansion of the Eastern Conference - the Impact lost to the Revolution with seconds remaining in added time. Will the Impact change its name in 2021 to the depressingly generic (and English) Montreal FC? "FC" stands for "football club."
25 b) Kent Nagano The American conductor was supposed to exit the regular Orchestre symphonique de Montréal season in June with Mahler's Second Symphony ("Resurrection") and bid his outdoor farewell to Montreal in August in Beethoven's Ninth. Instead, his final live performance appearance as OSM music director was at an annual benefit event to raise funds for children's programming. The sold-out Mahler concerts were styled as postponements, not cancellations. 26 b) Erin O'Toole The federal Leader of the Opposition announced on Sept.
18 that he had tested positive, presumably having acquired the coronavirus from a staffer. Legault self-isolated accordingly, but did not develop the disease. Several politicos (including Bloc Québécois leader Yves-François Blanchet) have picked up the bug. 27 a) A karaoke bar The Quebec City night spot was linked to dozens of late-summer COVID-19 infections in August and helped put the capital on yellow alert. The province promptly banned karaoke in September - as well as other more orderly forms of the performing arts. 28 c) Norman Webster Editor-in-chief from 1989-1993, this resident of North Hatley was the author of an immensely readable weekly political column in the Gazette up to Jan. 10, 2010, when he posted a colourful portrait of Yemen. A foreign correspondent for (and editor of) the Globe and Mail, Webster recently revealed that his original ambition was to become sports editor at the Sherbrooke Record.
29 c) Air Creebec Having temporarily discontinued regular passenger service because of the pandemic, the Creeowned airline, headquartered in Waskaganish restarted Montreal-Val-d'Or flights in August.
Now they operate daily. Timmins to Moosonee (both in Ontario) is a popular route. The airline also services Whapmagoostui, a former Hudson Bay Company outpost and the northernmost Cree village in Quebec. 30 a) Drivers REM trains will be fully automated.
No need for a driver, nor a cockpit at the front. Designers from Alstom, the French-based transportation company, co-operated with a request to make the "driver's seat" panoramic and youngster-friendly. 31 d) Nelligan Premièred by the Opéra de Montréal, the pop-opera hybrid with words by Michel Tremblay has been revived a few times, including last January by the Théâtre du Nouveau Monde. The flashback treatment of the troubled poet Émile Nelligan (1879-1941) includes a setting of his most famous lyric, Le Vaisseau d'Or. Gagnon, who was 84, lived for years in Nelligan's house on St. Louis Square. 32 b) Val-des-Sources Tired of living in a town named after a notoriously toxic substance, a total of 2,796 residents of Asbestos - 48 per cent of eligible voters - cast their ballots for a romantic alternative. There were other options, including Phénix. Val-des-Sources squeaked through after three run-offs with a slight majority of 51.5 per cent. Residents will be called valsourciens or valsourciennes.
33 b) Simone Simoneau: Chronique d'une femme en politique Simone Simoneau is a community organizer who runs for a seat on city council and encounters an array of obstacles that prove to be surmountable. Plante has said about the non-standard literary format: "I think it's accessible, it can be fun, and I love graphic novels myself." The English title is Okay, Universe: Chronicles of a Woman in Politics. 34 a) Dion Thérèse Tanguay Dion, who died on Jan. 17 at age 92, was the mother of Céline Dion, but also "like the mother of all of Quebec," according to talk-show host Julie Snyder, who turned the affable matriarch into a cooking-show icon. A native of the Gaspésie, she raised 14 children with her husband, the late Adhémar-Charles Dion. Maman Dion did much to promote the career of her youngest child. 35 c) Guy Lafleur The famous forward turned up without his sweater in a fundraising spot for the CHUM, owing to the refusal of the Canadiens to let their logos to be used, even for the benefit of a hospital. Lafleur, who turned 69 on Sept. 20, had received a successful quadruple bypass at CHUM the year before. Said the Flower: "I am very proud to be the ambassador for two great Montreal institutions and I wish nothing but success for both of them." 36 d) A whale The humpback was the first of its species to be seen so far upriver. "It might be because it followed prey, it might be because it's a young whale exploring or it could because the whale is disoriented" were among the explanations offered by an expert. Unfortunately, the visitor disappeared by June 7. Its remains were spotted on June 9 near Varennes, east of Montreal. 37 a) Trudeau Airport Deprived of its normally bustling summer schedule, the orchestra under its former principal guest conductor, Jacques Lacombe, made an offbeat appearance in Parking Lot P-5 of Trudeau Airport. Listeners in their cars tuned into a drive-in style FM radio signal. Beethoven's Fifth Symphony was greeted with much honking. 38 b) Tampa Bay Rays Stuart Sternberg, principal owner of the shaky Florida franchise, told the Tampa Bay Times that the prospect of a two-city team has not been affected by the COVID catastrophe. "It's become more important not to be reliant on one place and one market," he said. Baseball commissioner Rob Manfred has said that Montreal is a potential "stand-alone" if the league expands to 32 teams. Stephen Bronfman is mentioned as the potential Montreal partner.
39 d) CJAD The English-language "voice of Montreal" was started, remarkably, by a francophone, J. Arthur Dupont (1901-1967), whose initials form the call letters. Dupont began his broadcasting career as an announcer in 1929 for CKAC, the first French-language radio station in North America. 40 c) FACE The Fine Arts Core Education school was then known as Fine Arts Core Elementary School (FACES) and advanced only as far as Grade 8, which explains Harris's switch to Westmount High in 1978. Her divorced mother, Shyamala Gopalan, was a breast-cancer researcher working at McGill University and the Jewish General Hospital. Prior to FACE, Harris attended Notre-Dame-des-Neiges primary school on Côte-des-Neiges Road. The French language did not stick. The future VP writes in her memoir: "I used to joke that I felt like a duck, because all day long at our new school I'd be saying, 'Quoi? Quoi? Quoi?'"

