The use of stun guns by Montreal Police soared to 383 incidents in 2018 from 236 in 2017, according to the force's annual report.
Police Chief Sylvain Caron defended the increased use of electroshock weapons after presenting the annual report to Montreal's public security commission.
"It reassures me to have stun guns instead of using a firearm," Caron said to reporters after the meeting. "If verbal means don't work and other methods don't work, we want our people to use a stun gun instead of a firearm," he said.
Caron noted that in most cases, police officers don't have to actually use their stun gun but simply demonstrate they have it to defuse a situation.
"As a general rule, that is sufficient to calm a person who is in contact with reality, since obviously sometimes we have people who are not in contact with reality," he said.
Of the 383 times the weapons, often referred to by the trade name Taser, were used, police officers just demonstrated them 336 times, used them on people from a distance by projecting the electrical charge 46 times and applied them directly to a person's body at close range once.
Police spokesperson André Durocher said the fact they were only actually used on people 47 times shows that stun guns are an effective deterrent.
But opposition councillor and committee vice-chairperson Abdelhaq Sari said the rise in use of the weapons was worrisome.
"This can only increase the number of complaints we can have and it could create a clear correlation in terms of the perception of racial and social profiling," said Sari, the councillor for the Marie-Clarac district in Montreal North.
In April 2018, the police department announced a plan to equip all patrol cars with one of the electroshock weapons by 2020.
Committee chair Alex Norris, who questioned Caron about the increased use of stun guns during the presentation, said the city administration is studying whether giving one to every pair of police officers on the beat would make the public safer or put citizens at greater risk.
"The priority of our administration is to emphasize de-escalation," he said.
"We believe that is the best way to handle many situations and that repression should only be used as a last resort."
In April, the police department announced that over the next three years, 2,700 patrol officers will take a one-day training session to learn how to de-escalate tense situations and improve their conflict resolution skills.
While undergoing an organizational restructuring to solve deep-seated problems within the force, Montreal Police also dealt with a killer heat wave and the legalization of cannabis, Caron noted in his presentation.
Appointed to the job last November to replace interim chief Martin Prud'homme, Caron said restoring public confidence in police and shoring up morale in the 6,000-member force (including civilians) remain top priorities.
Caron said morale within the force has vastly improved in the wake of reforms introduced by Prud'homme, who returned to his position as director of the Sûreté du Québec. In March, he was relieved of his duties pending a probe into allegations of criminal conduct.
During the 2018 heat wave, which killed 66 people according to Montreal's public health authority, about 690 police officers went door-to-door to visit vulnerable residents of more than 25,000 dwellings.
Caron said he was preoccupied by a rise in pedestrian fatalities last year, when 18 pedestrians were killed, up from 15 in 2017. Most of the victims were over 55 years old.
There were 32 homicides on the island of Montreal in 2018, up from 24 in 2017. However, Caron noted the murder rate has dropped dramatically compared to 10 or 20 years ago.
Crimes against people went up by nearly two per cent, while crimes against property dropped by nearly six per cent. mscott@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MARIAN SCOTT;The Gazette

