The city of Montreal defended the treacherous condition of its sidewalks on Monday saying an exceptional cocktail of snow, rain, freezing rain and plummeting temperatures played havoc with its snow clearing and salting operations during the weekend.
"It's the worst (weather) conditions that you could bring together and it hampered our ability to get ahead," said Philippe Sabourin, a city spokesperson. "We don't deny that there are icy sidewalks."
The wacky weather led to a miserable return to school and work for thousands of Quebecers who had to navigate slippery sidewalks that were covered in a thick layer of ice. Plunging temperatures overnight Sunday froze water that had accumulated on sidewalks and some streets, the city said.
By noon on Monday, staffat the Montreal General and Royal Victoria Hospitals had already treated more than a dozen people for wrist or ankle breaks, a level three or four times higher than normal. Some hospital staffalso turned up in the emergency room with broken limbs after falling, said Ian Popple, a media relations officer with the McGill University Health Centre.
Urgences-Sante confirmed that there was a large increase in the number of people they transported to hospitals on Monday because of falls. "They aren't just falling on the sidewalks in Montreal, they're falling in their driveways, entranceways and in parking lots," spokesperson Benoit Garneau said. "We are picking them up from everywhere."
Low temperatures mean that many sidewalks could remain icy for a few days, Sabourin warned, adding that pedestrians should be careful when walking and ensure they have boots with good traction.
The city of Montreal has to clear and salt 10,000 kilometres of roads and sidewalks and "we can't be everywhere at once," Sabourin said. He said city employees have been working hard since Saturday and said there is no miracle recipe to immediately thaw icy sidewalks.
As they wait for the ice to thaw, or for the city to spread more abrasives, Montrealers found their own tools to get around on Monday. Many pedestrians walking downtown were using trekking poles for stability. At the downtown Sports Experts store, a clerk said he sold more than 40 pairs of crampons that provide traction on the ice.
A spokesperson for the Agence metropolitaine de transport said workers did their best to keep platforms and parking lots free of ice, but they were hampered by gusting wind that blew away the abrasives that had been spread during the weekend. "We were watching the weather closely, but the changing weather conditions made it difficult," Fanie Clement St-Pierre said.
At Montreal's Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport, many flights were delayed on Monday because of de-icing.
Environment Canada said skies will be cloudy on Tuesday with a 60 per cent chance of flurries in the afternoon and a high of -10 C. On a positive note, Hydro-Quebec said it had restored power to almost all Montreal homes that lost electricity on Sunday night.
kwilton@montrealgazette.com
Credit: KATHERINE WILTON; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Many pedestrians, like this man on Henri-Julien Ave. near Jean-Talon St., chose roads over icy sidewalks on Monday.; PHOTOS: DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Morgan Pruneta uses hot water to remove ice from his car on Gounod St. in Montreal on Monday. Montreal and parts of Quebec were hit by an ice storm on Sunday.; PHOTOS: DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / A snow-clearing operation removes the ice on Berri St, near the corner of Louvain St. in Ahuntsic on Monday.

