We interrupt this sweltering heat wave to bring you some news to help cool off.
In five months, you'll probably be complaining it's too cold when the Canadiens and Boston Bruins square offin the 2016 NHL Winter Classic on New Year's Day at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, Mass.
As Environment Canada was issuing a heat warning Wednesday for Montreal, with the combination of temperatures and humidity levels giving humidex values near 40, the NHL was holding a Winter Classic news conference just outside Boston, where the temperature was 31C.
"It's 90-plus degrees (Fahrenheit), we're in a football stadium, Patriots are reporting to camp today, the defending Super Bowl champions ... a little bit of news around the Patriots today," NHL commissioner Gary Bettman said, referring to the "Deflategate" controversy surrounding Patriots quarterback Tom Brady. "And we're here to talk hockey. It doesn't get any better than that."
In hockey, it definitely doesn't get much better than Canadiens vs. Bruins.
The New Year's Day matchup will be the 730th regular-season meeting between the two Original Six teams and the 910th including playoffs.
The Canadiens have a 355-264-103-7 regular-season record against the Bruins and have won 25 of their 34 playoffseries. But New Year's Day will mark the first time the two teams meet outdoors.
The first meeting between the Canadiens and Bruins was on Dec. 8, 1924, at Boston Arena, which is now known as Matthews Arena and home to the Northeastern University Huskies. It's North America's oldest indoor hockey rink. In a sign of things to come, the Canadiens won that first game 4-3.
"When you think about sports franchises with traditions of excellence and success, the Boston Bruins, the Montreal Canadiens and the New England Patriots would have to rank at the top of any list," Bettman said.
"When you think about rivalries that perfectly summarize the excitement and passion of NHL hockey, the enduring legacy of the Bruins and Canadiens would merit lofty status as well."
Bettman added: "Through their combined 34 Stanley Cup and Super Bowl titles, the Patriots, the Bruins and the Canadiens all have been dominant in their respective sports."
Canadiens fans will proudly point out that the Habs have won 24 of those championships, compared with six for the Bruins and four for the Patriots.
Patriots owner Robert Kraft said during the news conference that it was "an honour to be in the same category as these two franchises" and was probably happy just to talk about something besides "Deflategate." Earlier in the day, Kraft issued a statement defending Brady and ripping the league after the QB's four-game suspension for his role in using under-inflated balls in last season's AFC Championship victory over the Indianapolis Colts was upheld by NFL commissioner Roger Goodell.
Kraft talked about how it was the Habs-Bruins rivalry that first got him really interested in sports.
"It is one that first (stoked) my interest in sports, even though I'm dating myself in the early '50s, and really was a big part of turning me into a passionate sports fan in this region," he said. "I'll tell you that I remember as a young boy being under the covers in my bed late at night with my transistor radio under the pillows listening to the likes of Milt Schmidt and Sugar Jim Henry against Boom Boom Geoffrion and Rocket Richard. So for me, a little kid from Fuller St. in Brookline (Mass.) listening to those games and then having these two teams come here, it's a great thrill."
He added: "The power of this rivalry was also ingrained early on in other members of the Kraft family because I was thinking back to 1980 when Jonathan Kraft, on his 16th birthday, had only one wish: He wanted to see the Bruins play the Canadiens at the old Forum. We drove from our home up to Montreal and we bought two scalped tickets, and I'm a little embarrassed to say that I paid in 1980 over $100 for each of those tickets.
"While the Bruins lost that game unfortunately, 6-1, Jonathan and I have a great memory of Stan Jonathan's huge takedown in a fight against local boy Chris Nilan of the Canadiens in the third period of the game. And that always stuck with us."
Jonathan Kraft is now president of The Kraft Group - the holding company for the family's many business interests - and heir to the family throne.
The Winter Classic will put more money into the pockets of the elder Kraft, who has a net worth of more than US$4 billion, according to Forbes, as tickets to the hockey game in his stadium will cost a lot more than $100. The NHL revealed that information in an exclusive ticket pre-sale offer for Bruins, Canadiens and Patriots seasonticket holders that will be sent out "in the coming days." Forbes reported that the average price for tickets to last January's Winter Classic between the Chicago Blackhawks and Washington Capitals at Nationals Park was listed at US$508 on TiqIQ, with the cheapest seats going for $268.
The NHL is really milking these outdoor games and you have to wonder when the novelty will wear off. But for now it remains a case of supply and demand, with the 15 previous outdoor games - including seven Winter Classics on New Year's Day - attracting 853,228 fans, an average of 56,886. A crowd of about 70,000 is expected to watch the Habs play the Bruins, and there are two other outdoor games on the 2015-16 NHL schedule.
Canadiens fans will be happy to know that the visiting team has an 11-3-1 record in outdoor games, including 5-1-1 in the Winter Classic. And according to Accuweather.com, the average Jan. 1 in Boston has a low of -4 C and a high of 3 C. Feel a little cooler now? scowan@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/StuCowan1
Credit: STU COWAN; The Gazette

