132 BAR VINTAGE 132 Fleury St. W. (between St. Urbain and Waverly Sts.)
514 419 1404 www.le132.com/
BALSAM INN RESTAURANT 1237 Metcalfe St. (kitty-corner from Dominion Square) 514-507-9207 www.lebalsaminn.com
Drink your veggies!
That's the latest word from Montreal's hippest bartenders. Cocktails have been getting crafty for a while, featuring local and seasonal ingredients. But this summer, Montreal bartenders are taking it one step further, incorporating garden-fresh vegetables like cucumbers and jalapeno peppers and such herbs as rosemary, thyme and basil into their highballs, old-fashioneds and spritzes. At 132 Bar Vintage on Fleury St. W., for example, they make cucumber water by juicing whole unpeeled cucumbers, then add it to a drink called The Mosquito. Jonathan Elbaz, the bar chef there, makes a mean margarita, too, fuelled by jalapeno-spiked simple syrup.
Downtown, at Balsam Inn Restaurant, the bar menu looks like the sequel to a seed catalogue: a half-dozen of the inventive cocktails for which the Metcalfe St. restaurant is known feature some form of garden green or herbal extract.
Next door, sister restaurant Dominion Square Tavern may have started Montrealers' love affair with herbal cocktails five years ago when it introduced the drink that has since become a perennial favourite: deep-green Basil Rye, which features rye whisky, lemon juice, simple syrup and fresh basil leaves shaken with ice.
Adding vegetables to cocktails isn't just an attention-seeking way to be different (even if a drink made with bok choy juice sure does draw attention to itself ). It's not about the nutritional content, either (though the vitamins and minerals can't hurt). Lea Wolosianski, the manager of the Balsam Inn, who created the cocktail menu, says that in the heat of summer, the most refreshing drinks are not-too-sweet herbal ones with a mildly bitter flavour profile.
"In summer, I'm looking for drinks that are really refreshing and thirst quenching. I want the sour from citrus juice and the mild bitterness of Aperol or dry vermouth," she said.
In her own cocktail adventures, Wolosianski says she's seeing a lot of rosemary, basil and thyme in addition to ubiquitous mint. Herbs are popping up more in ingredient lists not just on gin bottles, but also in vermouths and liqueurs. Bitter herbal liqueurs like Campari have long been popular as aperitifs and digestifs in Europe, but now there's a wave of interest in them among North American craft bartenders, too. One of Wolosianski's favourites these days is Farigoule, a sweet thyme liqueur made by Distilleries Provence. It is a traditional liqueur from the south of France that uses an infusion of thyme, sugarcane syrup and alcohol (plus a little sage, angelica and lemon verbena). Wolosianski says it arrives in SAQ stores only a few times a year, so she hoards it when she can and replaces it with her own homemade thyme-infused simple syrup when it runs out.
Another of her current favourites is Cynar, a dark-brown Italian bitter liqueur made from 13 herbs and plants, including artichoke (though that taste doesn't really come through, thankfully). It's great mixed with soda and served with fresh-squeezed lemon or orange juice.
Over at 132 Bar Vintage, Jean-Maxime Giguere says gin's herbal bouquet makes it extremely popular in summertime. He especially loves gins like Hendrick's and Tanqueray Old No. 10 because they are so aromatic. But he's also fond of two small-batch gins from Northern California: Uncle Val's Botanical Gin and St. George Botanivore Gin.
"Because it is herb-y itself, gin goes very well with fresh-pressed juices and herbs," Giguere says.
Here are a few veggie-centric cocktails. Get ready ahead of time by preparing the simple syrup: Simmer equal parts sugar and water for a minute or two, until the sugar dissolves. Cool and store in the fridge until ready to use.
THE MOSQUITO
This one, featuring cucumber water, is a summer hit at 132 Bar Vintage. Use a juicer to make the cucumber water or puree a couple of unpeeled cucumbers in a food processor, then pass the puree through a fine-mesh sieve. (You might need to add a little extra water with this method to reach the desired quantity.)
1 1/2 ounces tequila
1/2 ounce Chartreuse liqueur
1/2 ounce cucumber water (see note above)
1 ounce simple syrup
1 ounce freshly squeezed lime juice
3 fresh basil leaves (plus another for garnish)
Cucumber slice for garnish
In a cocktail shaker filled with ice, shake all ingredients. Strain into a long Collins glass and garnish with a fresh basil leaf and a thin slice of cucumber.
Here are four cool, refreshing cocktails on the menu this summer at Balsam Inn:
LE VERJUS
This is not like any cocktail you've ever drunk before - a perfect balance between sweet and sour. It is based on verjus, the non-alcoholic juice pressed from unripened grapes, and it lends a gentle acidity to cocktails. (You'll find it at specialty grocers.)
The liqueur Farigoule is available at SAQ stores, but not always. If you can't find it, substitute homemade thyme liqueur. Try this recipe of Wolosianski's: In a medium saucepan, combine two parts sugar and one part water. Add a small bunch of fresh thyme sprigs. Bring to a boil, then reduce heat and simmer for four to five minutes. Let cool without removing thyme, then strain into a clean bottle and store in the refrigerator. The syrup will keep for several weeks.
1 1/2ounces verjus
3/4 ounce vodka
1/4 ounce Farigoule thyme liqueur (or thyme-infused simple syrup)
Thyme sprigs for garnish
In a shaker with ice, shake together verjus, vodka and Farigoule or thyme syrup. Pour into an old-fashioned glass and garnish with a fresh thyme sprig.
APEROL SPRITZ
This is a classic Italian aperitif.
The bitterness of the brightorange Aperol and the fizz of Prosecco make for a refreshing summer drink. Add a sprig of basil for aroma, if you'd like.
1 ounce Aperol
3 ounces Prosecco
2 ounces club soda
A slice of orange, for garnish.
Pour Aperol into a wine glass and add Prosecco. Top with club soda and garnish with orange slice.
CYNAR CUP
This is a beautiful, hardly sweetened amber cocktail made with the Italian bitter called Cynar. At Balsam Inn, they use Contratto red vermouth and Canadian Club 100 per cent rye.
1 ounce rye
3/4 ounce red vermouth
1/2 ounce Cynar liqueur
Club soda
Lemon zest, for garnish
In a shaker with ice, shake all ingredients and serve in a tall glass.
WHISKY SMASH
2 ounces bourbon
10 mint leaves
3 wedges lemon
1/2 to 3/4 ounce simple syrup
In a cocktail shaker, using a muddler or the end of a wooden spoon, muddle together all ingredients. Shake with ice, strain and serve over ice in a low old-fashioned glass. Garnish with the tender tips of a fresh sprig of mint.
Credit: SUSAN SEMENAK; The Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Bar chef Jonathan Elbaz of 132 Bar Vintage prepares The Mosquito drink, which uses cucumber water, at the bar in Ahuntsic.; PHOTOS: DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / ; PHOTOS: PIERRE OBENDRAUF, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Lea Wolosianski prepares a summer cocktail called Verjus at Balsam Inn Restaurant.; PHOTOS: PIERRE OBENDRAUF, MONTREAL GAZETTE / From left, some cocktails prepared by Lea Wolosianski: Whisky Smash, Aperol Spritz, Le Verjus and Cynar Cup.

