Despite the unexpected latesummer heat wave we've enjoyed this past week, the first vivid patches of red and orange are beginning to appear, and there's a new little chill in the early morning air hinting at the cooler autumn days to come.
Although I'll miss summer days lounging by the pool and hanging out on sunny terrasses, I'm looking forward to chilly nights cozied up by the fireplace, playing games, reading books, strumming my guitar, visiting with friends or just staring into the flames.
My neighbours and I will soon be preparing for fireplace season: splitting and stacking cords of wood, sweeping chimneys free of creosote, and clearing out old ashes.
When you live Off-Island, a wood-burning fireplace or stove isn't just a luxury. For those of us without backup generators, having a fireplace and a good stash of well-seasoned wood is a practical hedge against freezing during our all-too-frequent winter power failures.
In the few short years we've lived here, I've lost count of the winter nights we've spent bundled up in darkness, playing board games by the fire while we waited for the lights to come back on. Thanks to the fireplace, those chilly days without power have been some of the best. Now, when the power flickers, the kids get excited to roll out sleeping bags by the fireplace and break out the Yahtzee and Monopoly.
For many Montrealers, however, snuggling up by an old-fashioned wood-burning fireplace will soon be a thing of the past. As of Oct. 1, a new City of Montreal bylaw goes into effect that will ban the use of wood-burning appliances that don't meet strict emissions standards. Those who ignore the ban could face fines ranging from a few hundred dollars to thousands of dollars for repeat offenders. For now, however, the ban only applies to the city's 19 boroughs, not demerged municipalities or Off-Island.
Perhaps one day the fireplace ban will spread to the rest of the West Island and across the bridge. The environmental argument against wood-burning fireplaces is hard to refute. In Montreal, it's estimated that 60 per cent of winter smog is due to burning wood. According to the Quebec Environment Ministry, wood smoke is a health hazard, both inside and outside the home.
But foolishly, and a little selfishly, I'm glad I can still look forward to lighting mine up this fall. We humans are not always logical creatures. It may be bad for me, but I can't resist the appeal of a crackling fire. I want to enjoy it as long as I can.
CREDIT: BRIANA TOMKINSON;The Gazette

