We can only assume there will be weather fit for beach reading some time before September; with a little luck it may even have arrived by the time you're reading this column. As we know, a law of nature links sunshine, sand and surf with genre fare, and sure enough, an array of writers with local connections have been landing with new offerings.
Lawyer/writer Peter Kirby has been gaining momentum with his Luc Vanier series of taut noir thrillers; Open Season (Linda Leith Publishing, 360 pages, $16.95) was actually published late last year, but having recently been named winner of the Arthur Ellis Award for Best Novel, this multi-layered narrative of a Guatemalan journalist kidnapped in Montreal could be the one to put him over the top. John Goldbach, whose alterna-thriller The Devil and the Detective has attracted a small but adamant cult, is back with the story collection It Is An Honest Ghost (Coach House, 144 pages, $18.95), a dip into which confirms a writer equally comfortable in a number of modes, from the supernatural to the accessibly experimental. Legions of Kathy Reichs devotees marking time until the next Bones instalment can avail themselves of Trace Evidence (Puffin, 304 pages, $12.99). Co-written with son Brendan Reichs, this set of four novellas can be taken as an ideal introduction to the Virals series of mysteries featuring teen heroine Tory Brennan, greatniece of forensic anthropologist Temperance. Technically it's Young Adult, but aren't we all young adults when we look in the mirror?
And then there is Trevor Ferguson, whose series of thrillers written as John Farrow have drawn a following far outstripping his critically acclaimed literary work. The new Seven Days Dead (Minotaur/Raincoast, 298 pages, $36.99), set on an island in the Bay of Fundy where the widely despised local patriarch is on his last legs and a nasty struggle to fill the vacuum looks imminent, might be the best Emile Cinq-Mars novel yet. Grand Manan bears many of the hallmarks of island cultures: locals suspicious of outsiders, a festering internal class divide, a hardcore perfectly happy living without electricity, and a flaky fringe, in this case a secretive gathering of New Age oddballs intent on learning how to levitate. Early on, a maverick pastor is gruesomely murdered deep in the forest on a stormy night, and into the resulting cauldron of suspicion steps the now-retired Montreal cop Cinq-Mars for what's meant to be a restorative summer retreat with wife, Sandra. There are no prizes for guessing he gets drawn into the investigation, but beyond that, the mounting sense of unease lets us know we're in the hands of a master. The best crime fiction has always strained against genre confines; Ferguson as Farrow is at the forefront of writers blurring that line to the point where it may soon no longer be needed.
Being John Farrow: A short conversation with Trevor Ferguson
Q Do you find that you can scratch all your literary /artistic itches within the crime genre?
A Oddly enough, Seven Days Dead was taking up residence within my synapses for a time as, potentially, a literary novel. That germination never jelled until I let go of the literary conceits and invited the crime novel in. What eluded me initially was that I didn't have a central character on which the book could turn. The moment Emile Cinq-Mars stepped onto the page, the book was born and I realized almost immediately that he was the answer the story was looking for.
A difference with crime is that narrative drive must never be relinquished, and I'm fine with that. I have to be more self-critical, more judgmental, with respect to how much philosophizing enters the fray, as it's something my character enjoys but the form is uneasy with him when he does so. I do have to be judicious and pick my spots, but that's not so different. Otherwise, it's all systems go.
Q Like your last (non-crime) novel The River Burns, Seven Years Dead explores an isolated community with semi-outlaw elements. What attracts you to such settings?
A The juxtaposition of cultures that are virtually diametrical opposites interests me. Just as individuals learn of themselves when they are challenged or assailed by others, so it is when groups are in opposition. People either learn and adapt, or they retreat. Either way, tensions arise, and that leads to a story unfolding. Folks in Dark Harbour on Grand Manan lived for decades offthe grid - both electrically and socially. They dwelled in shacks and roughhewn homes on the side of a cliff, and lived offwhat they could gather from the seashore. On another cliff, you have Harvard professors living in their summer mansions, an entirely different enclave. Then you have the regular folk, although they can be surprising, too. A significant number of fishermen, for instance, have degrees in English literature. A high number of deaths among them are attributed to recreational drug use. So they live traditional lives, but not in a traditional context. When these groups come together and rub up against one another, a friction occurs that creates sparks. You might say that my job as a writer is to fan the flames to see who can survive the fire.
Q Emile Cinq-Mars is showing his age. Do you have an endgame in mind for him, or will he run indefinitely?
A Emile is showing his age, and I hope to make the most of that. His endgame may well depend on mine, but for the nonce we're both OK. The next two books are written, the next one after that is well underway, and so far he's still standing, although he's hospitalized at this very moment thanks to a bullet hole and a blood infection. Moving him into retirement has freed him from the dictums and doggerel of the police department, allows him to be afoot and explore different locales, but it also has him facing his mortality, the challenges of being an older man with a younger wife, and having to engage younger and more virulent criminals with depleted physical strength, stamina, or his usual quickness of mind. He must adapt. That by itself interests me. A writer ought to allow his or her characters to be themselves, and not be puppets on the writer's strings. Which is to say that the hour of his death can no more be known to Emile Cinq-Mars, or by me, than it is for any of us.
Q Do you keep up on contemporary crime fiction?
A I'm not the leading expert on it. I was speaking to an agent (not mine) in New York last year, and he speculated that what makes my books unique may have to do with the fact that I'm not well read in the form. Arguable, but that may be the case. I did come to the form after reading the likes of Martin Cruz Smith, James Lee Burke and the espionage master John LeCarre. They all write well, and out-write many a literary maven. As I move through the genre, and meet more writers, I'm realizing how extraordinarily diverse and talented the field is. Literary writing is, thankfully, judged by the best of its offerings, which has the effect of raising the profile of lesser writers; yet crime fiction is too often categorized by the least of its writers, which has the effect of diminishing the achievements of the best. May that change. In any case, I'm out to change it.
ianmcgillis2@gmail.com
Credit: IAN MCGILLIS; The Gazette
Illustration R.A. FERGUSON / Trevor Ferguson says his beloved character Emile Cinq-Mars is showing his age, "and I hope to make the most of that."

