It probably won't be a white Christmas, and that's something Montrealers should get used to.
"There's still some uncertainty, so I wouldn't say the probability is zero, but there are definitely more chances for a green Christmas for Montreal," Environment Canada meteorologist Alexandre Parent told the Montreal Gazette.
Parent said after several days of colder than normal temperatures, it's expected to snow over the weekend and warm up for the next few days.
By the time Christmas rolls around, however, temperatures are expected to hover a little above the freezing point.
There is some precipitation in the forecast, but so far that will come in the form of rain, Parent said.
"There's still some uncertainty around that system because it's still a few days away, but all the models point to a rain event on Christmas Eve."
For it to be considered to be a white Christmas, there have to be two centimetres on the ground on Dec. 25 in the morning, Parent said. If the predictions for the next week hold, it looks like Montreal is heading for its third green Christmas in a row.
While many people have taken to making their own outdoor skating rinks in their yards this year, Parent said perhaps amateur ice makers should wait until after Christmas to start up their rinks, as the temperatures will be above the freezing mark.
"Up until the 24th, temperatures will be near zero, but it's going to climb up over that, so they may have work to do on their rinks for Boxing Day," he said.
According to statistics provided by Environment Canada, there have been 17 green Christmases since 1955 - six of those have come since the turn of the century.
The last time there was a white Christmas, it was 2017 and there were 18 centimetres of snow on the ground, Parent said. It used to be all but a sure thing for Montreal to be under a white blanket on Christmas Day, but that has been less likely in recent years.
"From 1963 to 1984, there was an 83 per cent chance of having a white Christmas, and in the last 20 years, it's a 68 per cent chance. We can see there is a trend, and that is the case throughout the country," he said. "We're seeing less and less snow cover, fewer snow days and that translates to fewer white Christmases." jmagder@postmedia.com twitter.com/jasonmagder

