By this time last year, 66 people had died in Montreal during the summer's first heat wave. More than two-thirds of the victims were over 65. While the temperatures of the current heat wave are not expected to be as high as those in 2018, older adults remain the demographic that is most vulnerable to the hot spell.
"It's a balance between having to go outside long enough for your health, but not going outside for too long because of the heat," said Elizabeth Crawford, 79, whose family is helping her manage that balancing act.
Last summer's first heat wave lasted from June 30 to July 5, and at one point there were so many deaths that the city's morgue was filled to capacity. Of those who died, a disproportionately high number were older adults living alone or suffering from a chronic disability.
According to Constance LaFontaine, the associate director of research project ACT Concordia focusing on senior citizens, 51 per cent of Montreal seniors are renters and 36 per cent of those live alone. And 61 per cent of seniors live with a disability.
"We're accustomed to thinking about heating in the winter as a basic necessity in Canada, but we also have to think about cooling in the summer for older adults," LaFontaine said.
Through ACT Concordia, LaFontaine has heard many instances of landlords telling senior citizens to not install air-conditioning units in their windows, despite the sweltering heat. After contacting Quebec's Régie du logement, LaFontaine discovered that it was legal for landlords to refuse the installation of air-conditioning units for esthetic reasons.
"This is a small example of how public policy can put people in a position of vulnerability, and can even put their lives in danger," she said.
To respond to excessively high temperatures this year, the city's public health department created a registry that shows neighbourhoods and homes that are at the highest risk. The city is leaving it up to boroughs to extend hours at swimming pools. For example, the wading pool at Martin Luther King Park in Côte-des-Neiges is open until 7:30 p.m. for the rest of the heat wave.
Still, LaFontaine is more concerned about how governments are communicating with the older public.
"We've seen a shift over the last five years towards more online communication from all levels of government," she said. "We need to understand that older people who are vulnerable are not the people who are online."
Said Crawford: "Old people don't know about the help that is available to them because it's all online."
For Crawford, the lack of communication between the government and older adults during a crisis is reflective of society's treatment of senior citizens.
"They don't care about us old people," she said. "If you're past a certain age, nobody cares. People don't look after each other here."
Still, she feels grateful for having the help of her family during this heat wave.
"There's nothing better than family. I feel sorry for seniors who are alone, because there's nothing worse than being alone." dsucar@postmedia.com
CREDIT: DANIEL SUCAR;The Gazette

