Louise Charbonneau could have made other plans for her Labour Day weekend, but instead she decided to make the 90-minute drive down to Montreal from Trois-Rivieres.
"I wouldn't miss this for anything," she said outside Ecole Le Plateau on Monday, where Bloc Quebecois Leader Gilles Duceppe gathered with candidates for a party council meeting and rallied his supporters with a 30-minute speech.
"We're here because we believe," said Charbonneau, a campaign director in Trois-Rivieres. "We've been pushing for Quebec to become a country since Rene Levesque. For us, Quebec can't go without the Bloc Quebecois in Ottawa."
Cars decorated with Quebec flags and Bloc Quebecois stickers filled the parking lot outside the school as hundreds gathered from all over inside, using small Bloc pamphlets to wave offthe heat.
Duceppe used the event to rebrand the campaign itself: after displaying the slogan "Qui prend pays, prend parti" around the province in recent weeks, the party will now be running behind "On a tout a gagner."
The party leader stood in front of a majority of the party's 78 candidates as he pushed for Quebec sovereignty and focused on why Quebecers should vote for the Bloc instead of the New Democratic Party.
Recent polls have suggested the Bloc has an uphill battle ahead. The party barely registered in Montreal on a Mainstreet/Postmedia poll last week, and a CROP poll conducted on behalf of the NDP showed Duceppe could be in trouble in his own riding, Laurier-Sainte-Marie.
But in Duceppe's speech, there was little mention of a party trying to overcome the odds or facing the reality of potentially not winning any seats come Oct. 19.
If feeling desperate, Duceppe hid it behind confidence - the Bloc dropping from 54 seats to four over the last decade was presented not as a decline but as a sign of resilience instead, and supporters boasted that his return to the helm of the party this summer has breathed new life into it.
Duceppe mentioned Conservative Leader Stephen Harper a handful of times and Liberal Leader Justin Trudeau even less, but described Mulcair as a foil to what the Bloc stands for.
He said Quebecers looking for change in 2011 were "seduced" by Jack Layton but ended up with Mulcair instead, adding that the NDP hasn't done anything for the province in four years.
"For Quebec now, change is passing from orange to blue," he said. "From the NDP to the Bloc Quebecois."
The Bloc leader got most animated when addressing environmental issues. He blamed the federal government for the Lac-Megantic disaster, discussed pipelines and accused Mulcair of flip-flopping his stance on the Energy East Pipeline.
"With independence we'll decide ourselves if there will be pipelines that pass on our territory," he said as he brought his fist down onto his podium, working the crowd on hand into a standing ovation. "We won't let Calgary and Ottawa decide what happens on our territory."
Mario Beaulieu, former Bloc leader, now the president of the party and candidate in the Montreal riding of Pointe-de-L'Ile, said the focus on the NDP is a result of Bloc candidates meeting many Quebecers who are the fence between the two parties.
"We saw a lot of people who are undecided, and who want to vote for the NDP to get rid of Mr. Harper," he said, "but strategic voting in that way can be very unpredictable in terms of results." He echoed what Duceppe pushed for in his speech, which is for Quebecers to "vote with their hearts."
Duceppe ended his speech on the idea of Quebec becoming a country.
"With independence we can establish coherent government programs to help our families, support our regions, train our workers, and take care of our people," he said.
"We have everything to gain by making Quebec a French-speaking country, free and proud in the land of America."
Duceppe sealed his appearance with a kiss to his wife before making his way outside to his campaign bus - freshly adorned with the party's new slogan - where he posed for a few photos with supporters before taking off.
He was heading to officially open his campaign office in Laurier-Sainte-Marie, which he represented for almost 20 years before losing to the NDP's Helene Laverdiere in the last federal election.
jfeith@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/jessefeith
Credit: JESSE FEITH; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Bloc Quebecois Leader Gilles Duceppe waves to supporters during a campaign stop at Le Plateau primary school on Monday. He used the event to rebrand the party's campaign.

