Our city merits a far better theme song than Tourisme Montréal's just-launched and excessively kitschy Reviens-moi - which doesn't even name Montreal.
I propose Vanilla Ice's vintage Ice Ice Baby, which doesn't name the city either, but whose creators must have had Montreal in mind. The tune is catchier and one can even dance to it - except on Montreal sidewalks.
"Yo, VIP, let's kick it Ice ice baby Ice ice baby ..." But please, don't kick it, because you could wind up in a hospital emergency ward, having to deal with anything from a badly bruised behind to a broken hand or hip, or a combination thereof.
Our sidewalks have morphed into skating rinks. Perhaps you've even taken the plunge, unintentionally performing a double Lutz before landing on your butt. One would have to possess the dexterity of a Cirque du Soleil performer not to go Slip Slidin'Away (another candidate for city anthem) while trying to walk one's pooch.
Admittedly, it doesn't help that climate change has resulted in wildly fluctuating temperatures and rapid weather shifts, leading to snow, ice pellets, freezing rain and sundry plagues from the heavens that have left our sidewalks in perilous conditions at times.
The good news is that the Plante administration is ready for battle. The city even purchased eight croque-glaces - which only sounds like designer cocktails or sandwiches made of ice. At a cost of nearly $20,000 each, they are actually ice-crushers or chewers - sidewalk plows replete with rotating, spiked barrels that can eradicate cursed crusts by reducing them to shreds of slush. Swell. The bad news is that our croque-glaces have had to stay in garages. While our sidewalks are slippery enough, it seems there isn't enough ice for us to utilize these gizmos.
Our sidewalk ice is just too thin.
A thickness of at least one inch is required before the croque-glaces are let loose.
So I guess the answer is that we will have to water our sidewalks, then wait for them to freeze in order to achieve the mandatory ice for the city to deploy its mini-army of croque-glaces.
In the interim, some citizens have taken to attaching crampons to their boots, because nothing else seems to work. Our current mix of salt and sand has been largely ineffective. And no one appears to have come up with some magical, cost-effective abrasive that can actually melt ice without forever damaging the environment.
Some have even suggested grandiose antidotes to our winter, such as erecting a massive dome over the city.
As an ex-chemist and inventor, not to mention inveterate walker, one might expect former Westmount mayor Peter Trent to be secretly working in his lab to come up with some ice-combating concoction.
Alas, he is not. "Unlike many people, I don't get too exercised about the use of salt," Trent says. "First, it is an absolute necessity for safety, especially in hillier parts of the city, and there really is no other alternative. Nor am I absolutely convinced it is so terrible for the environment, and being someone so concerned about the environment, I have never seen many studies proving the use of salt is really deleterious."
But salt is not effective in particularly cold weather, which is problematic. Ideally, sidewalks would be salted before ice is formed, but one would have to be a psychic to determine when that might be. There are also other de-icers out there, but they are far more costly than salt.
Trent is not high on a dome - although citizens might be, with all the accumulation of second-hand weed smoke.
"Quite apart from the cost, the resultant ventilation and condensation problems and buildup of gases would be horrendous within a dome," says Trent, an inventor of polymer composite material who has several worldwide patents to his name.
But Trent is high on heated sidewalks. "I'm a huge fan, but not all sidewalks - on heavily travelled ones, particularly downtown. It so improves livability in the city."
The Plante administration put the kibosh on heating Ste-Catherine St. sidewalks - first proposed by former mayor Denis Coderre - largely because of cost.
"In heavily used areas, it's economically logical," notes Trent, who was recently appointed to the STM's board of directors. "It's an investment for the downtown retail trade, which will pay off in the long run.
"But, really, whatever that cost may be, is it enough to allow people to have an accident that could incapacitate them not just for months, but maybe years? That is catastrophic. We really have to think about the quality of life of our citizens." bbrownstein@postmedia.com Twitter.com/billbrownstein
CREDIT: BILL BROWNSTEIN;The Gazette

