Jeff Reinebold, the Tiger-Cats' special teams coordinator, looked at Montreal's Dominique Ellis on the sidelines, held his hands out to his sides, and shrugged apologetically.
Hamilton kick returner Brandon Banks, who could dodge snowflakes during a blizzard, had just raced down the sideline 88 yards for a touchdown, his second lengthy punt-return score of the day. Third, if you count the one called back by a penalty.
Poor Ellis had been among those left flailing on both of the scores. Thus the sympathy shrug from the opposing coach.
Alouettes head coach Tom Higgins said he still wasn't sure what had happened as his players tried to tackle vapour.
"There's no way he should have been able to return that (second one) for a touchdown," said Higgins of Banks, who officially weighs 153 pounds but looks as though he would only reach that number with a couple of bricks tucked into his shorts.
"We had guys standing there," Higgins said of his would-be tacklers. "It's almost like he turned into Casper the Ghost" - old cartoon reference there, kids - "because we were grasping at air."
Banks finished with 226 punt-return yards, and the two back-breaking touchdowns, in Hamilton's 40-24 win in the CFL East Final at Tim Hortons Field, booking the Tiger-Cats a trip to the Grey Cup in Vancouver next week.
Appropriately nicknamed "Speedy," although Slippery would be just as accurate, Banks said his electric returns were just a matter of help from his teammates.
"They're just blocking, and I'm just running," said Banks, who played sparingly for the Washington Redskins for three seasons beginning in 2010. "These 11 guys get me to the second level, then I take it to the house."
When he accepted a scholarship to Kansas State in 2008, Banks said he was 147 pounds, the first football player ever to get a scholarship at less than 150 pounds. "But I'm probably 153 or 154 now," he said.
Banks shrugged offthe considerable degree of trash-talking that had emanated from Montreal in the week preceding the game: "Words don't mean nothing," he said. "You see what the scoreboard is."
The Als' chief braggart, receiver S.J. Green, at least backed it up. He had said that Hamilton defensive back Brandon Stewart had "no chance" to cover him, instructing reporters to "put that in the paper. He knows it." This was excellent foreshadowing, as Green totalled 126 yards on six catches, including three touchdowns.
Stewart, who was beaten on two of those touchdowns, said afterward that Green was a great receiver. "But we're playing next week, and they're not."
Zing. Alouettes quarterback Jonathan Crompton, who had run up a 9-2 record as a starter with efficiently dull play, finally broke the 300-yard passing mark for the first time all season, but his stats also included three interceptions, two of which came when the game was still on the line. Crompton was clearly trying to make something happen, but both passes were in the direction of receivers who were well covered. Sometimes, boring is a virtue.
Zach Collaros, his counterpart with Hamilton, threw for a modest 199 yards, no touchdowns, and had a red-zone fumble. Running back Nic Grigsby, who only joined the Tiger-Cats a month ago after being released by the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, had 93 yards on 18 carries, two of which ended in touchdowns.
Asked about the wonder of his late-season pickup, Hamilton head coach Kent Austin said it "was no credit to me. He was available."
Austin said the team jumped at the chance to sign a player of Grigsby's talent. (He had asked to be released after Winnipeg reduced his role.) "It was just good luck," Austin said. It also, one imagines, has the Blue Bombers wondering if they shouldn't have talked him into staying.
And so, the Tiger-Cats are in their second consecutive Grey Cup. It's been two seasons in which they played home games at the University of Guelph, and then at McMaster University, and then at a Tim Hortons Field that was still under construction and only half-finished for most of this year. At one point, the annual Labour Day classic against the Toronto Argonauts looked like it might have to played in Toronto instead of Hamilton, unless it was played in Guelph. In the end, it was held at the new stadium, with construction paused just long enough to allow a football game to take place. The Ticats are now 7-0 at the new stadium.
Austin said his team wasn't about to make excuses during its nomadic existence, though it's worth noting that the Ticats started 1-6 amid all that uncertainty.
"Look, we're still going to practise on a football field, we're still going to play a game on a football field," he said. "Every team has challenges."
It's a statement that seems to undersell Hamilton's specific challenges more than a little - even on Sunday, the new stadium was still ringed by temporary construction fencing, and a crane loomed over the south end zone.
Austin said the adversity might have been good for his players in the end. When they earned a first-round playoffbye with a victory over the Alouettes here in the season finale, the team had a week off, then scorched the Als at home again. They certainly looked like a team comfortable in its environment.
Outside the locker-room after the game, Tiger-Cats owner Bob Young was beaming under his yellow ball cap, and receiving handshakes.
How did he feel after this historically weird season? Surprised? Relieved?
"No," he said, then broke out into a wide smile, spying Austin as he exited the locker-room. The two men hugged.
"This guy," Young said, "told me we would get better. And we did."
Indeed. As Speedy Banks might say: look at the scoreboard.
Credit: SCOTT STINSON; The Gazette
Illustration CLAUS ANDERSEN, GETTY IMAGES / Brandon Banks breaks a return for a touchdown against the Alouettes. The Tiger-Cats won 40-24 in the East Division final at Tim Hortons Field in Hamilton,

