Filmmaker Janice Zolf came to Montreal as an outsider, to make a film about fashion designer Marie Saint Pierre. And she fell in love - with the city and with the art she discovered at what felt like every turn.
"I think when you live in Montreal you take it for granted," said the Edmonton native, who worked for years as a television arts and entertainment journalist based in London, Ont.
The first time Zolf experienced Cité Mémoire, Michel Lemieux and Victor Pilon's imaginative and lyrical take on some of the characters and events in Montreal's history, "my heart pounded on the street," she recalled. "I was in awe."
Cité Mémoire, which launched in 2016, is awesome, as anyone who has experienced it knows. Tableaus projected at night, mainly onto blind walls in Old Montreal, are accompanied by dramatic texts and original music. Lemieux and Pilon, internationally acclaimed multimedia artists known, among other things, for their work on Cirque du Soleil productions, created the concept and design for the more than two dozen tableaus; playwright Michel Marc Bouchard wrote the dramatic script for each short, movie-like tableau.
Actors in the tableaus don't speak but are portrayed in what Lemieux has called "the poetic way. ... This is our language, Victor and me - the idea of dreamscape." The audio, available in English, French, Spanish and Mandarin, is accessed by downloading a free mobile app to one's smartphone or tablet.
Having been a journalist for so long before turning to filmmaking, Zolf knows a good story.
"I put myself in the position of the audience - and I could feel there was a story in it," she recalled.
Zolf approached Lemieux about doing a film. A senior CBC producer based in Montreal, Carrie Haber, said the CBC would air it, which meant Zolf could secure funding from sources including the Rogers documentary fund.
Into the Light with Cité Mémoire, a 44-minute documentary written and directed by Zolf, takes viewers behind the scenes with Lemieux, Pilon and Bouchard. The film took Best Short Documentary and Best Female Director, Short Documentary, at the Arte Non Stop Film Festival in Buenos Aires, which wound up on Oct. 30; the previous week, it won the Old Oak Audience Choice Award at the Forest City Film Festival in London, Ont. It will stream on CBC Gem on Friday and air Saturday on CBC Montreal.
People to whom Zolf showed the film often described it as "a virtual road trip to Montreal." With the COVID-19 pandemic making travel difficult or impossible, a virtual road trip is a good thing.
For Montrealers, Cité Mémoire would make a fine pandemic outing: It's outdoors, for one, evenings are mostly quiet these days, and physical distancing is easily maintained.
Among several tableaus depicted in the film is one showing an orphaned Holocaust survivor, a teenage boy, stepping off a train in Montreal in 1947 as a couple waits for the little girl they were expecting; hundreds of such orphans were adopted by families in Montreal and other Canadian cities.
Another juxtaposes - and contrasts - the stories of two Black people in Montreal more than 200 years apart: Marie-Josèphe Angélique, a slave charged with setting a fire in Old Montreal, was tortured until she confessed and was hanged in 1734, although her guilt was never proved; baseball legend Jackie Robinson played in 1946 with the Montreal Royals - and in 1947 suited up for the Brooklyn Dodgers, becoming the first Black player in Major League Baseball.
"As a spectator, I felt that these people lived in the dark stones - and it was the light that brought them to life and made them real," Zolf said.
A few tableaus featured in the film are unavailable or being moved, including a delightful one in which hockey legend Maurice "Rocket" Richard almost single-handedly moves his brotherin-law's belongings from one flat to another - before scoring five goals that night for the Canadiens.
When the projectors haven't been knocked down in a windstorm, a mermaid-like Suzanne - she of the 1967 Leonard Cohen song - is projected onto the Old Port clock tower. Through archives licensed from Lemieux Pilon 4D Art showing footage and images by Jean-François Gratton, Cité Mémoire's director of photography, viewers see the underwater dancer depicting Suzanne as the tableau was being shot.
Cité Mémoire closed during the pandemic lockdown in March. Before reopening in June, Lemieux and Pilon created a moving tribute seen in the film to the resilience of Montrealers: It features a flame projecting onto the Palais du Justice and faces projected on to different sites, accompanied by words describing their attributes, in the many languages heard in Montreal. sschwartz@postmedia.com
AT A GLANCE Into the Light With Cité Mémoire will air on CBC Gem on Friday at 9 a.m. and Saturday at 7 p.m. on CBC-TV in Montreal. On Nov. 26 the French version of the film, Au coeur de Cité Mémoire, will air on Club Illico. It is set to air nationally on CBC in English on Jan. 2, 2021. Cité Mémoire is runs Wednesday through Saturday, from dusk to 11 p.m. It closes for maintenance in January and February. The audio is accessed by downloading the free mobile app Montréal en Histoires - producer of Cité Mémoire - to one's smartphone or tablet.



