Municipalities across Quebec were given the go-ahead on Saturday to open public pools during the summer despite the COVID-19 pandemic, provided people maintain physical distancing of two metres and wash their hands with soap and water before entering the facilities.
"The precautions that we've taken since the start of the crisis should not make us lose sight of the other essential health needs of our citizens, especially during hot weather," Health Minister Danielle McCann said in a statement.
"That is why opening these summer facilities is so necessary to ensure the comfort (in hot weather) of many people. Still, it's crucial to remain vigilant, maintain physical distancing and take other measures to limit the spread of the virus in the community."
Among the facilities that are authorized to open are public pools, wading pools and splash pads, which allow children to play in running water and spray their friends without the supervision of lifeguards. On Wednesday, the city of Montreal opened splash pads early to beat the heat wave.
City crews are also permitted to open water fountains, but the public is not encouraged to drink from them directly. People are being asked to bring water bottles to fill at the fountains.
The joint news release by Mc-Cann and Municipal Affairs Minister Andrée Laforest did not allude to private aquatic parks, which are often filled with thousands of people - environments where physical distancing is harder to maintain. Alexandre Lahaie, McCann's press attaché, said the government has not authorized the opening of such aquatic parks.
The government is also encouraging municipalities to clean their facilities more frequently, especially the push buttons of water fountains.
Saturday's announcement came as the government reported the number of COVID-19 hospitalizations dropped by 68 to 1,197 - a sign the strict confinement measures put into place during the 11-week-old lockdown are beginning to pay off.
Laforest suggested had the government not authorized the use of public pools during the coronavirus crisis, more people would have suffered from heat exhaustion during the summer.
Saturday's announcement would appear to be creating a double standard: continuing to limit public gatherings outside of pools to 10 people, while potentially allowing bigger crowds in swimming facilities.
Some city pools are usually packed with hundreds of children and teens during the summer. It's often a challenge for lifeguards to warn children not to run around the pool. It was not clear from Saturday's announcement whether lifeguards will also be responsible for enforcing social distancing.
Geneviève Jutras, Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante's press attaché, hinted that the city may have to hire more staff. She said the boroughs will reopen their public pools gradually, starting on June 20.
"This gradual opening of swimming pools will be based on the capacity to hire the necessary staff in each district to implement a public health protocol," Jutras added. "As for the hiring of lifeguards, that process was launched in February."
Health experts have noted the coronavirus is spread through the air, and not through water. Still, authorities are recommending the following precautions:
Wash your hands frequently with soap and water for 20 seconds, especially when coming in from outside.
Keep a distance of two metres from other people. If that is not possible, wear a face covering.
Avoid indoor gatherings.
Cough into your elbow. aderfel@postmedia.com Twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel

