It caused five deaths, stranded hundreds of motorists overnight, shut down schools and universities, flooded basements in Quebec City and dumped 47 centimetres of snow on downtown Montreal. But was this week's storm a recordbreaker? Hard to say, according to Environment Canada.
"It's a rare storm, but I can't say if it broke a record. It was definitely an exceptional storm," said Marie-Eve Giguere, a meteorologist at the Montreal weather office.
Local variations in snowfall, and the fact that snowstorms can stretch over several days, make it difficult to compare weather events from different years, Giguere said.
But one thing is for sure: this week's blizzard ranked up there with the so-called "storm of the century" of March 3-5, 1971.
"It was very similar, except 1971 was just north of the St. Lawrence River," Giguere said.
The 1971 storm unleashed 43 centimetres of snow on Montreal, with high winds, like Tuesday's storm. However, that storm was centred just north of Montreal, while Tuesday's was concentrated in a swath of southern Quebec from Montreal's South Shore to the Bois Francs region near Victoriaville, she said.
The record snowfall in Montreal was Dec. 27, 2012, with 45.6 centimetres.
But weather experts rank storms by their impact rather than just statistics, Giguere said. For example, the 1998 ice storm is remembered for the massive blackout that left millions in the dark for up to several weeks, or more in some cases, paralyzing businesses and causing the government to deploy the army.
This week's storm also "had major impacts," Giguere said, pointing to the fatalities, traffic chaos and closures.
Even within Montreal, there were significant variations in this week's snowfall, with 38 centimetres at Trudeau Airport Tuesday and Wednesday, compared to 47 centimetres downtown, she noted.
Hardest hit was St-Hyacinthe, 60 kilometres east of Montreal, with 75 centimetres of the white stuff, followed by St-Hubert, with 73 centimetres, and Beloeil, with 68.
North of Montreal, Mont Tremblant got just 15 centimetres, while the Lanaudiere region got 10-20 centimetres.
Winds of 70 kilometres an hour in Montreal caused blowing snow and low visibility, making roads hazardous.
In the Lower St. Lawrence region, east of Quebec City, winds reached 120 kilometres an hour, although snowfall was less than 30 centimetres, Giguere said.
With temperatures returning to near normal in the next week, when daytime highs will hover near zero, we won't be seeing green lawns again anytime soon, she said. mscott@postmedia.com twitter.com: JMarianScott BY THE NUMBERS 45.6 cm - The snowiest day in Montreal on record was Dec. 27, 2012, when a record amount fell on the city.
42.8 cm - The amount of snow at Dorval in the "storm of the century" on March 4, 1971.
38 cm - Total accumulation on March 14-15 in Dorval 43 cm -Total accumulation on March 14-15 downtown.
36 cm - Average amount of snowfall in Montreal during the month of March.
3 cm - Average amount of snow still on the ground at the end of March.
13 cm - Normal snowfall in April.
Credit: MARIAN SCOTT; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Michel Larouche shovels snow from his car before the city starts clearing de la Roche Street in the Plateau on Wednesday.

