While scores of Quebecers binged on meat pie and malt liquor this Christmas Eve, Mark Sirois's mind drifted into a visions of an icy future.
Sirois, 45, is an amateur meteorologist who admits he probably spends too much time daydreaming about low-pressure systems.
His weather obsession got the better of him on Dec. 24, when he first noticed the perfect storm brewing: frozen pellets, thick snow, rain and sleet set to blanket southern Quebec this Tuesday.
The picture only became clearer over the following week as data from a dozen international weather prediction models began to pour in.
At one point, Sirois even traced a map of Quebec on a piece of paper, held it up to his computer screen and compared a half-dozen weather models to see which regions of the province might be hit the hardest.
By New Year's Eve he was certain this perfect storm would come and the following day he posted a detailed alert message online - beating Environment Canada's prediction by nearly 24 hours.
When all the hours of tracing, number crunching and analysis ended, Sirois said he took a nap.
It is the precision and speed of this amateur sleuthing that's earned the 45-year-old a following of 6,382 daily readers on his Southern Quebec Severe Weather Network Facebook page. Some of his most loyal followers include snow plow operators, TV weather reporters and even Environment Canada employees.
"It may sound crazy but this is what I do for fun," said Sirois, who oversees IBM's major IT projects in Canada when he isn't chasing storms.
"Sometimes, I'll be watching The Bachelor with my wife and then - around 8 p.m. - the new long-term prediction models are released and I've got to slip away to check up on them. My wife thinks I'm a little funny that way."
Sunday's post - which garnered over 120 shares, 300 likes and dozens of comments -warned that Montreal will see a mix of snow, rain and sleet that will make driving dangerous in and around the city.
For Sirois, the fun about trying to predict weather comes because of its inherently unpredictable nature. Tuesday's storm, for instance, will be caused by a "Colorado low" system sweeping in from the Great Lakes and into Montreal.
Ordinarily, that would mean heavy snow but this particular system is wrapped around a pocket of warm air. That means we'll likely see fits of rain and freezing rain with the snow.
"A little bit east of Montreal, in Drummondville, the temperature at minus-1 may decide to fall as snow but it may mix with freezing rain.
"If it's snow, it'll accumulate one way. If it's rain, you'll see a different sort of accumulation," said Sirois. "It's hard to now exactly how much of what we're going to get. But that's where the fun lies."
Sirois broke his prediction down into regions. Places like Ormstown, Huntington and Lacolle in southern Quebec could be hit by up to 30 millimetres of rain. Meanwhile, in the corridor that encompasses Shawinigan, Trois-Rivieres and Quebec City, between 20 and 30 centimetres of snow is expected.
The area around Mont-Tremblant, Saint-Sauveur and Ste-Agathe could be covered in ice by mid-morning Tuesday - Sirois believes the region will see up to 15 millimetres of rain followed by about 20 centimetres of snow.
To those who doubt his bona fides, Sirois says his track record speaks for itself. In November, he beat Meteo Media by two days in declaring that Montrealers would see a white Christmas.
"Based on all the data I looked at, my feeling was we'd get enough cold days just before Christmas so that, on Dec. 25, there'd still be snow on the ground," he said.
"And I was right. I like to try to use long-term forecasts and get ahead of the major networks.
"I will tell you what people appreciate. They like knowing what will happen way in advance. They like the interaction.
"They ask questions and I answer everyone. They like the delivery and my attempt to explain why things happen and why things did not go as planned. There is an accessibility they do not get from other sources. My purpose is to give people as much heads up as possible so they can make alternative travel plans so they are kept safe. I can handle the criticism as long as people are kept alive." ccurtis@postmedia.com Twitter.com/titocurtis
Credit: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS; The Gazette
Illustration ALLEN MCINNIS / Amateur meteorologist Mark Sirois says people appreciate knowing what will happen way in advance. "They ask questions and I answer everyone," he says.

