Ah, to be young in Montreal, especially now when restaurant terrasses are spilling over with gorgeous twentysomethings sipping cocktails, nibbling charcuterie and relishing a city that Jay Baruchel may be abandoning but the rest of us are heartily embracing this time of year. Politics? Potholes? Playoffs? In summer, who cares? From June to August, Montreal is in deep short-skirt/muscle-shirt mode when the living is easy, the festival ambience kicks into overdrive, and on steamy nights, the lines at the neighbourhood glaciers snake down the streets. Few cities "do" summer better than Montreal.
On an especially sweltering recent Friday, I headed to the Main, or more specifically the strip of St-Laurent between Laurier Ave. and St-Viateur St. that has once again reclaimed its status as the cool section of that iconic street. In the 1980s, this very same hood was ground zero for branche Montreal, and the epicentre was the unbeatably awesome 24-hour bar/eatery/magazine stand/candy counter, Lux.
I've mentioned Lux in this column before - and how I miss it! You'd go to Lux to people-watch and gaze at pictures of Madonna or Sam Shepard in Interview magazine, which you couldn't afford because you blew your money on a bowl of Lux french fries, enjoyed with - gasp! - mayonnaise. Sure, there was The Shed down south on the Main near clubs like Business and DiSalvio's, but the streets around Lux in the '80s felt a little bit like Soho, where you could easily imagine a scene from Scorsese's After Hours coming to life.
Sadly, when Lux closed in the mid-'90s, that scene more or less died with it. Years passed, and restaurants came and went. But now that whole section of Mile End is feeling fresh again, thanks to a bevy of new hip retail stores and especially restaurants like Lawrence, Soy, Sel Gras, Mais, Sparrow and Magpie. As of last November, you can add the new Japanese bistro Thazard to that list.
A term designating a fish belonging to the mackerel family, Thazard is the brainchild of two of Montreal's most happening restaurateurs, Edward Zaki of Chez Victoire, Mimi la Nuit and BarBounya, and Dave Schmidt of Mais, Datcha, Le Mal Necessaire, Kabinet and Maison Sociale fame. The dynamic duo hired chef Hachiro Fujise (formerly of Cafe Sardine) to concoct a Japanese bistro menu. Cocktails were a given, and to further entice the after-hours youngins, from Thursday to Saturday the kitchen service would run until 2 a.m. When the restaurant launched seven months ago, there was a lot of buzz about the French-style gueridon service and hotdogs made from octopus. But on my visit both the service trolley and the octodogs were nowhere to be found. The charcuterie platter and seafood platter from the original menu appear to have been scrapped, too. Yet there's more than enough here to satisfy. Fujise's North American/Asian fusion cooking is presented in a small-plates style, with a steak and burger for those with bigger appetites and three ramen bowls to boot. I'm a fan of this new Nippon wave of casual dining laden with tatakis, tartares and tofu, especially in hot weather where a little spice and a lot of greens make sense. What a treat it was to be in this stunning space filled with young diners feasting on spring rolls, salmon and ramen.
We began with two cocktails, both excellent, if a little on the small side. Thazard's wine list isn't especially long, but the private imports on offer are tempting and well-priced. We opted for a bottle of Muscadet Clos de la Fevrie, a great choice to pair with this food and, at $48, an affordable one at that.
Salmon tataki and green papaya salad were the first two dishes to hit the table. Served with blobs of shiso jelly, green tea-infused oil and ginger-infused balsamic, the squares of slightly seared salmon had enough in the way of flavour enhancers, and a few vegetable chips to add texture. Very nice. The papaya salad was just as good, though I think a little Thai-style heat would have kicked the flavours up a notch.
After a surprisingly long wait (in a half empty restaurant), we were served our first hot dishes: chicken karaage and chef Fujise's take on poutine. The chicken, a house favourite I'm told, deserves all the praise it has been getting. Served in round nuggets with garlic aioli alongside as well as green herbs and kimchee, the chicken was lightly spiced, moist and just great when dunked in that potent garlic mayo. Yes! The poutine was piggier and even more delicious. Starting with a bowl of dreamy french fries, the poutine variation included a topping of kimchee, miso butter and cheddar cheese curds. The combination of flavours was an absolute treat, with a serious dose of tang boosting every bite along with the gooey cheese and perfect fries. I ate the whole bowl. Wonderful.
I guess I should thank the kitchen for the long wait before the next course in order to digest the poutine, yet the room was hot (an upping of air conditioning is in order) and the lights were constantly being lowered. After 20 minutes, I was ready to curl up under the table and take a nap. But then came the Wagyu burger and a bowl of tonkotsu (pork) ramen. The burger was good, and the accompanying fries were again, terrific. But the burger was garnished with kimchee, and by now we had eaten kimchee on three dishes. There is such a thing as kimchee overload; another drawback in using it on the hamburger was that it overwhelmed the flavour of the meat. Why bother using such elite Wagyu when the spicy, pickled cabbage is the flavour that dominates?
As for the ramen, based on a pork stock enhanced with shoyu (soy sauce), and served with pork belly, the classic boiled egg, and leek-infused oil, this version was kotteri-style: thick and opaque, packed with emulsified fats and made from long-boiled bones. Slight smoky and with a rich mouth feel, this version was very good, though probably better as a meal onto itself than the final dish of a long, hot night. I could manage only half the bowl - but I enjoyed every slurp.
Dessert might sound crazy after all this, but we polished offmost of a matcha creme brulee despite it's gloopy texture. I also enjoyed the molasses cookie coated with a thick lemon icing and served with a luscious, spiced chocolate mousse. Yum!
Prices are reasonable, especially as two dishes per person would be adequate (we had three and staggered out stuffed). Thazard also serves lunch weekdays, with most dishes priced under $12 and wines by the glass at $5. Sweet!
Though I still think my generation was lucky to have hot spots like Lux to make us feel with it in our youth, I'm kind of jealous that young people today can enjoy restaurants like Thazard with its slick decor and inventive Asian menu. It may not be open 24 hours a day like my old hangout, but they sure do more with the french fries.
criticsnotebook@gmail.com twitter.com/LesleyChestrman
DINING
THAZARD
2 1/2
$$-$$$5329 St-Laurent Blvd. (near Maguire St.) Phone: 514-802-8899 Website: thazardmtl.com Open: Weekdays 11:30 a.m. to 2 p.m.; Sun.-Wed. 6 p.m. to 11 p.m.; Thurs.-Sat. 6 p.m. to 2 a.m. Licensed: Yes Credit cards: All major Wheelchair access: No Vegetarian-friendly: Yes Parking: On surrounding streets Reservations: Essential Price range: Nibbles $2-$3; small plates $8-$18.
Ratings:
$ mains under $10
$$ $10-$20
$$$ $20-$35
$$$$ $35+
Credit: LESLEY CHESTERMAN; Montreal Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: VINCENZO D'ALTO, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The dining room at Thazard, on St-Laurent Blvd., where chef Hachiro Fujise dishes out his North American-Asian fusion cooking.; PHOTOS: VINCENZO D'ALTO, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The chicken karaage, a house favourite, is served in round nuggets with garlic aioli alongside, as well as green herbs and kimchee.; PHOTOS: VINCENZO D'ALTO, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The poutine includes a topping of kimchee, miso butter and cheddar cheese curds.; PHOTOS: VINCENZO D'ALTO, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The tonkotsu ramen is based on a pork stock enhanced with shoyu and served with pork belly, the classic boiled egg and leek-infused oil.; PHOTOS: VINCENZO D'ALTO, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Chef Hachiro Fujise prepares the poutine miso.

