The first big test of Quinton Byfield's quest for a Canadian world junior team roster spot wasn't facing older players or learning coach Dale Hunter's high-tempo system.
It was northern Ontario weather.
The Sudbury Wolves star finally hit the ice on Tuesday at Sixteen Mile Sports Complex in Oakville, Ont., after some travel headaches forced him to skip the opening session on Monday evening.
"I was trying to get a plane down here to Pearson (airport)," the 17-year-old said. "(I) listened to music, hoping the plane would take off. There were a couple of people (still at the terminal in Sudbury). A lot of them kept leaving, so it was getting lonely.
"Seven-hour delay, they finally cancelled it."
Rick Waugh, the Wolves'security/safety adviser and a longtime policeman, is Byfield's billet dad. He came to the rescue.
"He texted me when he saw the freezing rain and hail (in the forecast)," Byfield said. "Luckily, I have such great billets. They drove me down here, it took fourand-a-half hours, and I got here around 10:30 p.m.
"You want to get everything going and you're missing the first day. It puts you behind, but I'm here now and really excited."
He has already been on the ice here more than Alexis Lafreniere, his rival for first overall pick in the NHL draft next June at Montreal. There's a chance the Rimouski Oceanic forward and Quebec league leading scorer won't play in the two exhibition games against university all-stars starting Wednesday.
Lafreniere missed the Canada-Russia series last month, too.
"It was a decision by our group," Canadian GM Mark Hunter said. "We believe he needed (time) to regroup and be ready. He played with the team last year, so going forward, we all know he's going to be on the team this year."
Byfield and Lafreniere have not yet discussed the craziness of constant individual rankings and scouting opinions. So far, on most lists, Lafreniere is first and Byfield is second.
"We've just said 'hi'a couple of times," Byfield said. "He's a busy guy, too. It's hard to talk to him (with their schedules), but he seems really nice. I don't think about (the draft) too much. Every year is my draft year, as I always say. I go with that mindset and that no pressure is on me."
Byfield is the youngest player in camp. He's several months younger than Cole Perfetti of the Saginaw Spirit and defenceman Jamie Drysdale of the Erie Otters, the other 2002-born players in the mix.
He's also the biggest forward at six foot four and 215 pounds. His ability to use that frame against older competition will determine his fate this week.
"He's got to play a power forward style, be up and down the ice and finish his checks and play a hard game," Hunter said. "Of course, he's got great stick and puck skills, and he's a big body that can get to the net, which some of the smaller players can have a harder time (with)."
Despite his size, his OHL foes marvel at his ability to elude defensive players.
"In our pre-scouts, it's always try to shut down (No.) 55 (on Sudbury)," Peterborough goaltender Hunter Jones said. "He kind of gets lost in the offensive zone, gets the puck, and it's in the back of the net. He just finds a way.
"He's here for a reason." The younger junior players must, by international hockey rule, wear full protection to cover their face. Byfield stands out even more with his choice.
"I never wore a cage," he said. "I always had the fish bowl (shield). I wore that all through my minor hockey and I'm kind of used to it. It's not too bad. It gets a little foggy and hot in there. I asked (Hockey Canada's equipment team) to throw it on and they were nice enough to get me one."
The idea is to keep wearing it for another month.
Just last January, he watched his old Sudbury teammate Ukko-Pekka Luukkonen, the Sabres prospect and OHL MVP, backstop Finland to world junior gold in Vancouver.
"(He) went through it, so I talked to him a bit - but it's kind of hard to understand him when he's talking to you in Finnish," Byfield said with a laugh. "I try to get the best out of him. There's definitely a step (up). It's going to be a learning curve, but I think you take it in stride." It's just one more chance to impress.
"We figure big things the next couple of days (from him)," Hunter said, "and see where it ends."
Hopefully, back at an airport, but waiting for a flight to Europe - not Sudbury. rpyette@postmedia.com Twitter.com/RyanatLFPress
CREDIT: RYAN PYETTE;The Gazette