Forecasting that the humidex value is expected to reach 40 C, Environment Canada extended its heat warning for Montreal, Laval, Longueuil-Varennes and Châteauguay-La Prairie through to Wednesday evening.
In the warning, issued Monday morning, the federal agency noted that a "warm and humid air mass from the United States will track into southern Quebec today. High temperatures combined with humidity will produce humidex values hovering around 40," adding that "uncomfortable conditions will be particularly felt in these areas."
The high Monday was expected to be 31 C, feeling like 40 when combined with the humidity. There was a 40 per cent chance of showers through the evening. The temperature was not expected go below 20 C overnight - a criteria for a heat warning, according to Environment Canada meteorologist Steve Boily.
Although the current forecast predicts similar temperatures for Thursday night, Boily said he doesn't anticipate the weather warning will extend past Wednesday evening.
Boily explained that Montrealers are feeling the residual effects of thunderstorms in the Gulf of Mexico and around the Florida peninsula. He said the warm weather is blowing in from the south and southeast, bringing with it clouds and humidity.
There is also a chance of showers overnight Tuesday to Wednesday, Boily said.
Extreme heat can present risks for young children, pregnant women, older adults, people with chronic illnesses and people working or exercising outdoors.
Heat warnings are issued when very high temperature or humidity conditions are expected to pose an elevated risk of heat illnesses, such as heat stroke or heat exhaustion.
Youssef Amane, a spokesperson for the city's executive committee, said officials will be watching forecasts closely for the next few days but do not intend to issue an alert or an intervention for extreme heat.
The average predicted temperatures are not expected to be as high as the heat wave this month when more than 50 heat-related deaths were recorded in Quebec.
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

