Why a week off in the middle of a playoff run, you ask?
So we, as golf fans, can figure out just what the heck is going on.
Quick, get out the abacus and tell me the probability of No. 70
Chris Stroud, currently with an impressive-sounding total of 788
points, catching No. 1 Webb Simpson, who, with 4,711 points, is
3,923 up in the manufactured race for the FedExCup.
Having decided about mid-way through my middling high-school career
that advanced mathematics just weren't for me, I fear I cannot offer
you much in the way of statistical analysis. But who can, outside of
the PGA Tour number crunchers who made this crap up?
Sure, there was an exciting finish to the Deutsche Bank
Championship, where This-ain't-your-father's-belly- putter poster
boy James (Webb) Simpson and I-won-the- Canadian-Open-once-and-
haven't-done-much-since Chesney (Chez) Reavie battled it out in a
playoff. But some of the best stories from the Labour Day finish
were about guys who made it in by the skin of their teeth.
Ernie Els thought he needed a birdie on the 18th on Monday to make
it into the top 70, and he hit a 6-footer to make it (even though it
turned out par would have been fine). Stroud plunked in an eagle on
18 to seize the final spot in the BMW Championship. And Geoff Ogilvy
birdied 18 to live to play another day with the 69th rank.
"I knew if I didn't make birdie here my season was over and I was
going to miss out on a lot of golf, so I was really happy to hole
that sixfooter for birdie. That was a real knee-knocker!," Els wrote
on his PGA Tour blog. "I haven't celebrated a tied- 14th finish like
this for a long time."
It's fun to watch pros have to struggle to play on, but guess what?
It happens every Friday all year: It's called the cut. And just
making the cut usually isn't really something to celebrate.
Is it just me, or are the Fed- ExCup Playoffs just a bit too
contrived?
ExcuSE mE, SiR?
Interesting that Sir Nick Faldo recently told a Montreal newspaper
that Tiger Woods' window for passing Jack Nicklaus' record 18 majors
had closed, in his estimation, at the age of 35.
Faldo won his last major-- the 1996 Masters--at the age of 38, but
told the Montreal Gazette that Woods has too much going on in his
life to be able to focus fully on golf.
"Once my quality of mind-set for practice was broken, it's been
broken ever since," Faldo said.
A big hiT
While it's an impressive feat and a first since the PGA Tour
started keeping those stats, Dustin Johnson had little to show for
leading in both driving distance and driving accuracy at the
Deutsche Bank Championship.
The long-hitting Johnson averaged 344.1 yards from the tee and hit
the fairway 78.57% of the time, but putted poorly and faded to
finish tied for 42nd after averaging 30.3 putts per round.
Winner Simpson gave up 45 yards off the tee to Johnson, but his
28.728 putts per round got it done.
Perhaps the most well-rounded performance of the weekend, however,
came from Thomas Bjorn in his victory at the European Masters.
Bjorn led the field in driving accuracy (82.7%), greens in
regulation (80.6%) and was a respectable 24th in driving distance
(302 yards) and 28th in putting (29.3 putts per round).the impending
storm, though.
- - -
THE TEE BOX
LPGA TOUR
NW ARKANSAS CHAMPIONSHIP
FRiday-Sunday: @ Pinnacle Country Club (6,284 yards, par 71),
Rogers, Ark.
* Defending champion Yani Tseng is looking for her fifth LPGA Tour
title and eighth worldwide victory. Michelle Wie, who was second at
the Canadian Open, was second here last year. Canadians Lorie Kane,
Lisa Meldrum, Samantha Richdale, Alena Sharp, Jessica Shepley,
Adrienne White and Stephanie Sherlock are in the field.
PGA TOUR
BMW CHAMPIONSHIP SePt. 15-18
- - -
Keeping Score
Three picks to win the FedExCup
Anyone in the Top-70 could, technically, win the FedExCup, but
catching leader Webb Simpson is likely going to take at least one
victory in the last two events.
DUSTIN JOHNSON
Current rank: 2
Points behind leader: 897
Why he can win: Won the first playoff event, the barclays, to
establish himself as a contender. Stumbled at at the deutsche bank
Championship but is defending champ of next week's tournament, the
bmW Championship.
LUKE DONALD
Current rank: 4
Points behind leader: 1,836
Why he can win: the world No. 1 is the model of consistency, but
it's no secret that he longs to show he can win the big tournaments
too, and the bmW and tour Championship fit the bill.
JASON DAY
Current rank: 6
Points behind leader: 2,354
Why he can win: this kid is always lurking and he's going to emerge
one of these times. the big-game player was right there at the
masters and U.S. Open and the $10-million FedexCup wouldn't be a bad
consolation prize.
Dark horse picks
STEVE STRICKER
Current rank: 8 Points behind leader: 2,506
PHIL MICKELSON
Current rank: 10
Points behind leader: 2,671
CREDIT: TIM MCKAY

