PREVOST There's a vintage blackand-white photo on the wall of Laurentian Lodge that captures a trainful of merry young people on the old Train du Nord, heading up north on a Friday afternoon for a weekend of skiing. They would have loaded their skis and boarded the "snow train" at Mile End station in Montreal, gotten offat Shawbridge and then skied the rest of the way to the lodge or hopped a ride in a sleigh.
That was back in the 1940s or '50s and Laurentian Lodge Club, or Shawbridge Club as it used to be known, was still an exclusive residential cross-country ski club that drew its members from among Montreal's anglophone elite.
Wilder Penfield, the celebrated neurosurgeon who founded the Montreal Neurological Institute, was a member, and so was Brooke Claxton, the first-ever federal minister of health and welfare. (Club legend has it that Penfield was sitting by the fire at Laurentian Lodge when the news came over the radio that Queen Elizabeth II had bestowed on him the Order of Merit, the highest civilian decoration in the British Empire.)
Norwegian-born Herman "Jackrabbit" Smith-Johannsen, who introduced the sport of crosscountry skiing to North America, was another early member of the club after it was founded in 1927. He described it as a place "where one could ski from one village to the next, crossing through farm fields, climbing over fences, winding through maple groves, bushwhacking through the forest beside a quiet lake," according to the book Skiing Legends and the Laurentian Lodge Club (Price-Patterson), by Neil and Catharine McKenty.
The sprawling white clapboard house set back along a quiet road in what is now Prevost, in the foothills of the Laurentians, isn't nearly the exclusive club it used to be. Formal dress is no longer required at dinner (though jeans are still verboten and the men wear jackets, if not ties). And, except at fancy functions, members serve themselves instead of being waited on by staff in waistcoats and bow ties.
Membership has declined from more than 100 in the club's heyday to a current 70 or so members, most of whom are in their 50s to 70s. But the club is still going - the last remaining residential ski club in North America, a relic from a bygone era looking for reinvigoration.
Even in a brutally cold winter such as this one, hardy skiers gather at the lodge on Saturday and Sunday mornings for a hot cup of coffee. They wax their skis and get the lowdown on weather conditions, check the trail maps and then head out in small groups, depending on their age and level of expertise, to explore the many cross-country ski trails all around the area.
Some wait for a boxed lunch prepared by the resident chef, Andre Pelrine, who has cooked in the lodge's kitchen for 57 years. Others will return to the lodge for a hot lunch after just an hour or so of light exercise.
"Laurentian Lodge is sort of like winter camp for adults. We might set out across the road where there's a bridge to a trail down the hill. It's magnificent down there, with a nice run that is thrilling when conditions are good," said Ellen Moore, a retired schoolteacher who has been a member with her husband Jim since 1984.
"There are countless trails all over and few users, so they remain in excellent condition. And we are always in search of new ones."
A couple of members who live in the Laurentians come out on their snowmobiles after a storm to groom the trails, some of which were first mapped in the club's early days. Other trails bend and weave through birch woods and behind new housing developments, or follow the tracks of the Petit Train du Nord, which is now a ski trail in winter and a cycling path in summer.
After a day outdoors, they return for cocktails by the big fieldstone fireplace in the lounge followed by dinner in the dining room. Some will stay overnight in one of the 17 rooms upstairs.
"The lodge has always been a social place. People come to ski, but also to be together, to have fun," said Paula Pedicelli, who is here most winter weekends, as she has been for 22 years.
"Winter can be miserable in the city. But up here feels like a haven."
Since its beginning, only those who were sponsored by other members could join. But now the club has launched a campaign to broaden its base. It has cut membership dues in half this year (to $515 for a family membership, for example, and $320 for a senior single membership) hoping to attract new members, among them young families who will carry on the tradition.
The lodge, which sits on a former nine-hole golf course, is surrounded by glorious snow-covered fields dotted with evergreen trees, the arboreal forest in the distance. But when the golf course closed several years ago, the ski club lost the revenue it had earned by renting out the house in summer as a clubhouse for the golfers. Now it is hoping to find a new summertime tenant, either an art school, children's camp or hiking club, to help pay the bills.
Laurentian Lodge is as much a social club as a ski club. A couple of Saturdays ago, its members hosted a Spanish dinner and tango night featuring a cellist, a pianist, a soloist and two tango dancers. Every season there are five or six such events.
The house is a throwback to another time, a rare old building that retains many of its original features, including pressed-tin ceilings in some of the rooms and beadboard panelling throughout. It was built in 1893 as a farmhouse with a large kitchen and a sprawling veranda. Twenty years later, two wings were added, including one to house a sunny dining room with windows overlooking the lawns on all three sides.
Mont-Tremblant and St-Sauveur are where all the ski action is now. But it's here in the lower Laurentians, in old-fashioned ski clubs like Laurentian Lodge, that skiing got a jump-start in Quebec after its introduction in Montreal in the late 1800s.
For more information, call the lodge at 450-224-2626 and leave a message or email laurentianlodge@gmail.com. Or visit www.laurentianlodgeclub.com.
Credit: SUSAN SEMENAK; Montreal Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Top: Michael Boer gets ready to hit the trails at the Laurentian Lodge. He's one of about 70 members.; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Above: Francie Hamilton enjoys a quiet moment in the lounge of the Laurentian Lodge.; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Resident chef Andre Pelrine has cooked in the Laurentian Lodge's kitchen for 57 years. Here, he prepares a lamb dinner.; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Members of Laurentian Lodge prepare to head out on the ski trails. The lodge, which sits on a former nine-hole golf course, is surrounded by snow-covered fields dotted with evergreen trees, the arboreal forest in the distance. It was built in 1893 as a farmhouse with a sprawling veranda. PHOTOS: PETER McCABE-MONTREAL GAZETTE; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The lodge provides plenty of space for shoes when members are on the trails. It also has 17 overnight rooms.; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Cocktails are served in the lounge by a roaring fire in the fieldstone fireplace after a day spent outdoors.; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / A typical bedroom at the lodge is warm and cosy. Beadboard panelling can be found throughout the building.; PHOTOS: PETER MCCABE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The old-fashioned washrooms are equipped with vintage sinks.

