Max Pacioretty has a good shot at winning the Maurice Richard Trophy this season as the NHL's top goal-scorer, but he should already win a Good Guy Trophy for what he did on Wednesday.
The Canadiens had a day off Wednesday following a 4-2 loss to the Chicago Blackhawks at the Bell Centre Tuesday night and after a massive snowstorm dumped more than 40 centimetres on Montreal and the surrounding areas. The snow made driving dangerous - even on suburban side streets on the South Shore. That's where Lawrence Huang lost control of his car Wednesday while out with his girlfriend.
"I had a little accident ... I drove into a snowbank," Huang recalled in a phone interview Thursday night. "I got stuck there for a good 30 minutes trying to shovel the snow out from the side of the car."
While Huang tried to dig his car out of the snowbank, another car stopped and a tall man wearing jeans, a blue jacket and a grey tuque with a pom-pom on top got out and started walking toward him carrying a black-and-yellow shovel. It was Pacioretty.
"A couple of cars had passed by - not five, six or seven cars, it's more like one or two ... some (people) exaggerated the story," Huang said about a story that went viral on social media. "Still, not to take away what Max did."
Turns out Pacioretty is as good with a shovel as he is with a hockey stick. The captain leads the Canadiens with 33 goals and heading into Thursday's games was tied for third in the NHL, three behind leader Brad Marchand of the Boston Bruins and two behind the Pittsburgh Penguins' Sidney Crosby. The last Canadiens player to lead the NHL in goals at the end of a season was Guy Lafleur when he scored 60 in 1977-78.
After some digging and a helping push from the 6-foot-2, 215-pound Pacioretty, Huang's car was finally out of the snowbank.
Huang said he recognized Pacioretty as soon as the captain started walking toward him with shovel in hand.
"He's really tall," Huang said with a laugh. "He came over and said: 'Do you need any help?' "I've seen him a couple of times before, but I've never had a chance to talk with him because I always wanted to respect his privacy, even though I'm a big fan of his," Huang added. "That was the first time we ever had a little chat. He's a great guy ... an awesome guy." What did they chat about? "The conversation was pretty short," Huang said. "I just told him he was having an incredible season ... a little chit-chat and that was about it. Definitely, he's very nice and very humble. And from our little chat I could tell that he carries himself very well, extremely humble, even though he's one of the top scorers in the league. He doesn't let that change him."
Was Huang surprised one of the most famous people in Montreal would stop to help dig a stranger's car out of a snowbank? "For sure," Huang said. "But I think in any case that was the right thing to do ... it doesn't matter if you're a celebrity or a normal human being. I think anybody in that situation would offer to help ... it just turned out to be Max. He did the right thing and I have to give him thanks for that." Huang didn't ask Pacioretty for an autograph or anything like that after his car got out of the snowbank, but he did get a nice surprise from his girlfriend, who had been in the car with him.
"She was taking pictures of us doing the work," Huang said. "I didn't even know that she took those pictures, but a good thing she did."
Pacioretty posed with Huang for another photo after the work was done - with the pom-pom tuque still on his head and the black-and-yellow shovel in his hand.
Good guy. scowan@postmedia.com Twitter.com/StuCowan1
Credit: STU COWAN; The Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS COURTESY LAWRENCE HUANG / Canadiens captain Max Pacioretty stopped to help South Shore resident Lawrence Huang get his car out of a snow bank on Wednesday.; PHOTOS COURTESY LAWRENCE HUANG /

