For the first time since the city began hosting a marathon 28 years ago, downtown will serve as the start and finish line for 25,000 runners who are expected at the Oasis International Marathon de Montréal this weekend.
The new venue for the two-day event, which features a half-marathon and 10-kilometre, five-kilometre and one-kilometre races along with the 42.2-kilometre distance, is part of what its new organizer calls a fresh direction aimed at bringing the races closer to spectators.
"We wanted to be more central to our public and to offer them another experience of Montreal," race director Dominique Piché said.
Piché, a former Montreal police officer, also serves as race director for the Ironman triathlons in Mont-Tremblant.
In June 2017, Ironman bought the Rock 'n'Roll marathon series of races in North America and Europe, which includes the Oasis International Marathon de Montréal, and appointed Piché to produce the Montreal races.
In recent years, the marathon and half-marathon races started on the Jacques Cartier Bridge, wended their way down to Parc Jean-Drapeau, then travelled up Place Jacques-Cartier into Old Montreal and ended in Parc La Fontaine in Plateau Mont-Royal, following a fear-inducing climb up Berri St. under Sherbrooke St. W. near the finish.
This year, the marathon and half-marathon will start at René-Lévesque Blvd. and St-Urbain St. on Sunday at 7:30 a.m. Both routes head west along St-Patrick St. to Monk Blvd. before returning downtown through Griffintown. Both races finish at Quartier des spectacles on Ste-Catherine St. W. at St-Urbain.
And both groups of runners will get to sweat their way up Robert-Bourassa Blvd., though the marathon route also travels up Berri St. to venture east to Parc Maisonneuve before returning downtown.
While changing the course routes and moving the event site downtown were big undertakings, Piché said he also worked to raise prize money to bring elite runners back to the marathon after an eight-year absence.
"For me, Montreal is an Olympic town and when we have such a marathon as we do, elites are part of our DNA," he said. Piché, who was born in Hull, said he has an attachment to the Montreal race since it was his first marathon in 1996.
But there's one notable absence this year - there's no free public transit being offered to race participants. The race fee used to include return transit fare, which runners could pick up with their race bibs ahead of race day.
The race organizer paid for the transit tickets.
However, Philippe Déry, a spokesperson for the Société de transport de Montréal, said the transit agency isn't a partner of the event this year and said it was the race organizer's decision to not offer free transit.
The STM will add staff for the event, he said, but the agency is suggesting that runners buy their transit tickets in advance rather than on race day to avoid long lineups. Déry also said the STM warned the race organizer.
Piché offered a mea culpa and said he "profoundly hopes" to bring back free transit passes next year.
It was a combination of factors, Piché said, including last year's decision to cancel the marathon due to a heat wave, which entailed reimbursing 5,000 participants while trying to plan the changes for this year.
"I called it the perfect storm," he said. There was also time pressure to select entertainment befitting the Quartier des spectacles and to find an alternative to distributing plastic water bottles to runners.
"I'm still very behind the (free public transit) because I believe that we all have a responsibility to make sure that public transit is utilized more," Piché said.
"I'm working hard to give Montreal a marathon they're proud of." lgyulai@postmedia.com twitter.com/CityHallReport
CREDIT: LINDA GYULAI;The Gazette

