Five days after Hampstead Mayor William Steinberg compared Quebec's religious symbols ban to "ethnic cleansing," the town is still reeling from the political fallout.
News trucks from four television stations sat idling outside the town hall Wednesday, outraged commenters continued to flood the city's Facebook page and Prime Minister Justin Trudeau urged the mayor to apologize.
But within the suburb of 7,000 residents, people were hardly up in arms about Steinberg's remarks.
And while Steinberg said he never meant to hurt anyone by linking Bill 21 to ethnic cleansing, he said he will not apologize for making the comparison.
"I made it clear last week - I'm not talking about Rwanda or Serbia or anything that has to do with violence," Steinberg told the Montreal Gazette.
"The effects of Bill 21 will be to decrease the religious diversity within Quebec; immigrants are not going to come to a place where they're discriminated against, and the ones that are already here are going to be tempted to leave.
"As far as my remarks on ethnic cleansing, it was ethnic cleansing not with a gun but with a law ... peaceful ethnic cleansing. I didn't say anything about genocide."
Hampstead resident Corine Elkaim said she agrees with the mayor.
"I think what he said is right," Elkaim said. "Everyone in the country should have the right to practise their religion. We have to be able to live together."
One woman, who wished to remain anonymous, gave a thumbs up sign when asked what she thought about Steinberg's choice of words.
"My son wears the (Jewish kippah) and no one should tell him what to do or how to be," she said. "Don't tell us how to act, what to do, what to wear. I don't care if a Muslim woman wears a hijab on her head, I care about what's inside it."
Although all of the Hampstead residents interviewed by the Gazette said they oppose Bill 21 - which would forbid public school teachers, police officers and other civil servants from wearing religious symbols on the job - many said they dislike Steinberg's use of the term "ethnic cleansing."
"The comments took attention away from the harmful effects of (Bill 21)," said Arie Benchaya. "It was a bad idea to talk about the bill in those terms.
"I have a lot of family in France and I think (Bill 21) is sort of modelled on that approach. It doesn't work over there and I don't think it will work here."
Another resident, who wished to remain anonymous, said she is embarrassed by the mayor's comments.
"It's an embarrassment, he's an embarrassment and he should apologize. The comparison is completely inappropriate."
On the provincial scene, Liberal MNA David Birnbaum - an ardent opponent of Bill 21 - called Steinberg's words hurtful, while Premier François Legault said Tuesday they were "unacceptable."
Hampstead's Facebook page - generally reserved for news about garbage collection and youth sports - has become a forum for the mayor's detractors. Many now use the site's comments section to hurl insults at the mayor and demand his resignation.
"People should stop talking about, 'Is he going to apologize?'I've already said I'm not. I'm not going to apologize for what I didn't say," Steinberg said.
"If I say, 'I shouldn't have said it,'then people will think I'm retracting the whole thing. I stand by it." ccurtis@postmedia.com Twitter.com/titocurtis
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS;The Gazette

