Dominique Piché sees a bright future for the Montreal marathon.
"We're an Olympic city and my goal is to build this race to the point where it's one of the top-10 marathons in the world," Piché said after revealing details for the 2018 event at a news conference that featured appearances by Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante and a brass band.
"We would like to be in the same category as New York or Boston," said Piché, who serves as the race director.
"We have a long way to go, but there's no reason why we can't be as big as Ottawa or Toronto."
One step toward that goal is to attract elite runners. Piché has handed that task to Laurent Godbout, a former journalist who has also served as executive director of the of the Quebec Track and Field Federation.
"Our prize money is modest, only $50,000 total, but we have to start somewhere," said Godbout.
The men's and women's winners will each receive $5,000. The winners at last month's Boston Marathon each received US$150,000, while the New York winners collect US$100,000. Ottawa features the most lucrative Canadian race, with $40,000 to the winners.
The Sept. 23 race has been rebranded as MIMO - an acronym for Montreal International Marathon Oasis - and will feature a series of new courses with activities taking place around the Quartier des Spectacles.
Piché said another goal of the event is community involvement and he's drawing on Montreal's reputation as a city of festivals.
"We envision this as Montreal's fall festival," said Piché, who also directs the successful Ironman Triathlon at Mont-Tremblant. "We'll have music and other cultural events associated with the races. We want to encourage as many runners as possible to compete, but we also want to offer opportunities for non-runners to participate in the activities in the week leading up to the race.
"We'll have various events at Complexe Desjardins to promote fitness and a healthy lifestyle in the week leading up to the races and on Friday, people will have the opportunity to participate in the Montreal Marche à Midi," said Piché. "This will be a three-mile walk through the streets around the Quartier des Spectacles. Someday, I would like to see these walks spread to all the sectors of the city."
Piché said he and his colleagues drew on the city's history when they laid out the course for the 42.32-kilometre marathon.
"We tried to highlight some of the most interesting neighbourhoods," said Piché.
The runners will head west from Complexe Desjardins and weave their way through Chinatown and the Old Port before running along the Lachine Canal. They will return downtown on the same route and then embark on an eastbound out-and-back, which will include a loop though the Botanical Gardens.
"The course is good for the runners because they'll see the same streets going out and coming back, and they'll be able to plan how to pace themselves on the return," said Godbout.
There will be several other races in addition to the marathon. On Saturday, runners will be able to choose between five-kilometre and 10-kilometre races, and there will also be a one-kilometre race for kids.
For those not up for a full marathon, there will be a 21.1-kilometre half marathon on Sunday.
Last year's full marathon was cancelled because of a heat wave, which saw a high of 30 C and a humidex of 40 C on race day. phickey@postmedia.com Twitter.com/zababes1
CREDIT: PAT HICKEY;The Gazette

