QUEBEC Unable to shake its chronic labour problem, Quebec plans to launch a massive recruitment campaign to permanently fill vacant orderly positions in its CHSLD network.
But in the meantime, the province will continue cobbling together COVID-19 solutions, including making more use of Canadian Armed Forces personnel already lending a hand, Premier François Legault announced at his pandemic briefing Wednesday.
Legault made the remarks on the same day as Quebec continued with deconfinement announcements.
This time the government has authorized the reopening of hundreds of provincial campgrounds, outfitter lodges, marinas and summer cottages, starting Monday.
In the case of cottages, they have to be rented by one household unit or people who normally live together under one roof at a time, with a 24-hour gap between each group. Smaller chalets will have to be disinfected between customers.
Groups of friends can go camping together, but they will have to rent separate sites to ensure each group sleeps in different tents.
Auberges, motels and homes offered for rent will open outside of the greater Montreal and Joliette regions.
There are no real limits on inter-regional travel, which means a Montreal family suffering from the city heat could rent a cottage in another region. People have to limit their stops along the way, Tourism Minister Caroline Proulx said at a news conference.
"It's good news for vacationers and tourism businesses alike," Proulx said, conceding the rules are not exactly conducive for that 12-hour trip with the kids around the Gaspé coast.
The most well-off will be owners of recreational vehicles, which have their own sanitary facilities.
But the camping decision - which followed enormous pressure from ordinary Quebecers desperate for something to do this summer - was the only glimmer of good news Wednesday as the government continued to wrestle with labour issues in its CHSLD network and the fact many are not air-conditioned during the current heat wave.
A report issued by the Canadian Armed Forces based on their first-hand experience helping in the network highlighted the flaws in the system, from a lack of fulltime trained workers to shortages in protective equipment and deficient infection-control procedures.
More than 60 per cent of Quebec's COVID-19 deaths have taken place in the centres.
Reacting to the report, Legault said he did not learn much that he did not know already, but he noted it's hard to apply specific directives with so many new, under-trained, part-time personnel.
Legault thanked the soldiers - there are 1,000 on the front lines in 25 residences - for their work. He then announced he has asked Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to extend the mandate of the army in Quebec until Sept. 15.
In short, Quebec wants to make use of the extra hands until it is able to train more orderlies to take up the job.
"We hope, if it happens, that the second wave (of the virus) is not before Sept. 15," Legault said.
But later in Ottawa, Defence Minister Harjit Sajjan said it won't be possible to deploy troops in Quebec for another four months.
"We will not be able to go that duration just because we don't have the number of personnel," Sajjan said. "When you have our people working seven days a week, it's just not sustainable."
Legault, nevertheless, announced fresh plans to launch a massive recruitment campaign in the hopes of convincing 10,000 Quebecers to become orderlies in centres.
Quebec will offer three months of paid training to anyone interested in working in the field. The students will be paid $21 an hour, or $760 a week. If they are successful and get hired, their salaries will rise to $26 an hour, or $940 a week.
That would be the equivalent of $49,000 a year.
"I ask every Quebecer who can, to consider it seriously," Legault said. "We're talking about a rewarding job, which can make a real difference in people's lives."
Legault recognized recruiting 10,000 more people is a challenge - he has failed in the past - but said he hopes to convince some of the 10,000 temporary workers Quebec managed to recruit to stay.
"We may ask employees of the government to go and work in the CHSLDs for a few months," the premier added when asked what happens if the recruitment fails.
The government also responded to accusations by the opposition parties that it failed to foresee the current heat wave, which is making life miserable in CHSLDs.
Legault said a month ago that health officials did not want to take the risk of having workers enter the residences. It was also unclear whether air conditioners would spread the virus. pauthier@postmedia.com Twitter.com/philipauthier

