There is a brilliant series on Netflix by the name of Chef's Table that has many a food lover hooked. Now on its second season (with a third that will focus on chefs from France), the show's recent highlight was an episode devoted to Enrique Olvera, chef/owner of several restaurants including Pujol in Mexico City and Cosme in New York.
Not only is this chef a modest and endearing character, his food looks sublime, with takes on such classics as mole and tacos, as well as more personal creations like smoked corn with coffee mayonnaise and ant powder, and a meringue and corn cream dessert so enticing that I was soon on Expedia searching for flights to Mexico.
In chef Olvera's hands, Mexican cuisine is reaching new gastronomic heights - excellent, because like so many cuisines branded "ethnic," Mexican food has been relegated to the cheap-eats beat for far too long. With chefs such as Olvera making waves, Mexican cuisine is finally coming into the international spotlight. Yeah!
That said, in this part of the world, it still has a ways to go. Having reviewed but a handful of lacklustre Mexican restaurants over the years in Montreal, I have yearned to see Mexican restaurants
fully exploit the potential of this cuisine. Instead, I have eaten a lot of salsa, nachos and quesadillas, and watched many a waiter mix guacamole table-side with about as much enthusiasm as a meter maid sliding tickets onto windshields.
But lately I have a feeling Montreal Mexican may be turning a corner. You can eat tacos at dozens of places around town, and a lot of them are seriously delicious. But beyond the cool taquerias, we're finally seeing Mexican restaurants taking this cuisine in all sorts of fun directions (like the excellent Escondite, reviewed this summer) or emphasizing authenticity, like this week's restaurant, Emiliano's.
The new Old Montreal eatery opened in mid-June with its goal spelled out right on the menu: "Show Montrealers and the world what real authentic Mexican cuisine looks like."
Sounds good to me. I dined at Emiliano's twice, and on both occasions the restaurant was close to capacity while many of the surrounding restaurants were close to empty. Has bistro ennui set in? Perhaps. Emiliano's happens to be a pretty hopping place with a large bar, high tables, an added second-floor dining room, an open kitchen in the back and Mexican music playing at a loud-but-still tolerable volume.
Our firecracker of a waitress, Patricia, welcomed us with a smile and went over the menu in some detail. Mexican food lovers will find such favourites as tacos, ceviches, tamales, quesadillas and enchiladas, but there's also a good selection of dishes beyond the Mexican faves served at Cancun all-inclusives.
I suggest beginning with Emiliano's guacamole, served with either homemade tortilla chips or "chicharron," curls of fried pork fat. Like hummus, guacamole has become the go-to snack a lot of us are making and munching on at home. This one stands out because of its chunky texture and because the chips aren't overly salted, therefore not overwhelming this subtle avocado condiment/dip. Paired with a not-too-jolting "perfect margarita," as it was called on the menu, this duo provided the ideal entree to the evening.
After reading the description of the first soup on the menu, the "sopa Azteca," I ordered it straight away. Good move, as this lusty mix of roasted tomatoes, pasilla peppers, panela cheese and creme fraiche, garnished with slices of avocado and strips of crispy tortilla, was one of the best soups I've tasted in ages.
I'd also highly recommend the grilled queso fresco plate, which features a stack of pan-fried queso fresco cheese, a slice of chorizo sausage, avocado and julienned mango. Plated alongside are three warm tortillas used to wrap up a bit of everything in that stack, top with a squeeze of lime, fold over and devour. So, so good.
After the entrees, the next part of the menu comes under the category of "street food." From there we sampled tacos and quesadillas. Served in threes, the tacos I tried were the tacos "carnitas"- filled with pulled pork, onion, cilantro and radish - as well as the fish tacos garnished with jalapeno, avocado, grilled cipollini onions, lettuce and lime (tell me you're not drooling after reading that list of ingredients).
The pork taco was good because the meat was so tender, but the fish taco was the one to beat. The fish was crisp, the tortilla was soft, the lettuce provided crunch and the jalapeno, a welcome spicy kick. Terrific!
As for the quesadilla, not my fave, alas, as the pork pieces inside the folds were tough, and taken as a whole the quesadilla seemed to be missing that extra element to take it into "wow" territory. Instead, try the enchiladas, especially the green enchiladas. Filled with shredded chicken and flavoured with cilantro and onion, the tortillas are topped was so good that I spooned some onto the pork tacos.
After an abundance of tortillas, it was a bit of a relief to try a dish served without a wrapper. We opted for the chicken with mole, paired with coconut rice and stuffed with cheese and chunky mushrooms.
Though I wished the chicken breast wasn't so dry and stringy (overcooked as it was), the stuffing was moist and scarffable, and the mole offered layers of spice and fruit flavours with tingly heat and a less chocolatey taste than one anticipates in a mole (chocolate is the standout ingredient in mole, but truth is there are far more nuts, garlic, chilies and fruit in its makeup). For dessert, there's a silky classic flan served with a coffee and tequila caramel. Yum! The "tres leches," the famous Latin American cake made with evaporated, condensed and regular milk, was nice and moist and topped with plenty of coconut shavings. Thumbs-up.
We limited our beverage intake to cocktails, beer or water but there's a better selection of wines here than expected, though I wished there were more South American - or especially Mexican - wines available to offer even more in the way of discovery. The cocktail list could be beefed up, and the beer selection needs work, as three listed were not available. The Mexican brand that was on the list is about as exciting as a Molson Canadian.
Though no gastronomic event, my night at Emiliano's was a success because the food was delicious, the service was excellent, and the people could not have been more friendly. I'd come back here in a heartbeat, not only for the many dishes I have yet to try (the cactus salad ... the chile ... the tamales) but simply to sit back, relax and have a bit of fun. What a welcome addition to the scene.
DINING
EMILIANO'S 2 1/2 $$-$$$
Where: 260 Notre-Dame St. W. (corner St-Jean Street)
Phone: 514-316-8017
Open: Lunch weekdays 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Mon.-Wed. 5 p.m. to 11 p.m.; Thurs.-Sat. 5 p.m. to midnight.
Website: restaurantemilianos.com
Licensed: Yes
Credit cards: All major
Wheelchair access: No
Vegetarian-friendly: Yes
Reservations: Essential
Parking: On surrounding streets with meters, several lots in the neighbourhood
Price range: Starters $10-$18; street food: $11.50-$21; main courses $21-$27; desserts $9
Credit: LESLEY CHESTERMAN; The Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: MARIE-FRANCE COALLIER / Chef Carlos Flores at Emiliano's, which opened in June in Old Montreal on Notre-Dame St. near St-Jean St.; PHOTOS: MARIE-FRANCE COALLIER / Mole with stuffed chicken breast, onion cilantro, pineapple, corn, pistachio and rice.; PHOTOS: MARIE-FRANCE COALLIER / The chunky guacamole is a winner.; PHOTOS: MARIE-FRANCE COALLIER / The grilled queso fresco with mango, avocado, chorizo and cilantro.; PHOTOS: MARIE-FRANCE COALLIER / Tacos with white crispy fish, jalapeno, avocado, cilantro, mayo, roasted cipollini, lettuce and lime.

