In the last three months, three major food halls have opened in Montreal's downtown core, jumping on a bandwagon that has already taken the world by storm. Those who remember Place Ville Marie's Mövenpick know the phenomenon has existed before - even Marché Artisans, which opened a couple of years ago in Fairmont The Queen Elizabeth hotel, offers an array of counters and a luxury approach to lunch foods in a cafeteria context that approaches the concept.
The difference with these big new food halls (or food marketplaces or emporia or whatever you call them, so long as it isn't "food court") is that it isn't one outfit providing the food, it's a selection of Montreal chefs - the hotter and buzzier, the better. And unlike food courts, there are no multinational chains allowed.
As Montreal Gazette columnist Josh Freed recently wrote, the reasons we love food halls are many, from the convenience to the variety to the primo people-watching.
But how do these new spots differ from one another? The grandest: Le Cathcart Restaurants et Biergarten The latest addition to Montreal's food hall roster, Le Cathcart opened on the bottom floor of Place Ville Marie on Thursday, and it wins the prize for best esthetic. Designed by Sid Lee Architecture, it's airy, comfortable and luxurious, with lasting materials like brass, iron, marble, wood, black-and-white tiled flooring and well-stuffed peach, teal and aubergine leather seating. The atmosphere is eclectic and loft-like, thanks to a variety of zones, each with its own design vibe. And the pièce de résistance is the biergarten's fully glassed ceiling, which reveals the grandeur of the surrounding skyscrapers.
Filled with plants that reflect the greenery of the now-visible Mount Royal, Le Cathcart is an oasis among the area's food courts. And of course, the important part: the food! The dozen or so restaurants, counters and coffee shops serving the 1,000 (!) seated spots run the gamut, from wood-oven pizzas by Pizza del Fornaio to tall-stacked fried chicken burgers from Chikin to platefuls of fragrant Middle Eastern goodies from Omnivore (try their mixed salad plate and their Beirut kefta sandwich). There are also mouth-wateringly generous bento boxes from the Japanese cantina Akio, courtesy of the project's patron-chef Antonio Park.
The overall array is less haute than Time Out, less international than Central, and the prices seem to sit right in the middle. 1 Place Ville Marie; lecathcart.com The chicest: Time Out Market Ride up the Eaton Centre elevator to Time Out Market and you'll be struck by the moodiness of the dark-designed space, featuring a black industrial ceiling and grey and cement surfaces illuminated with dramatic spotlights that reflect on the golden wood tables.
The fanciness carries through to the food options, which include outposts by renowned Montreal restaurants ranging from burgers signed by Toqué! to Club Chasse et Pêche to Montréal Plaza. So far, the most beloved by my trusted foodie sources are Moleskine's pizzas, anything from Olive & Gourmando, the decadent baked goods of Hof Kelsten and the Haitian-influenced dishes by Agrikol chef Paul Toussaint. There are 16 "unique food concepts" (their words) to choose from in all.
A meal here feels like something of an event - $30 for a burger and a glass of wine has that effect on me - and that elevated experience is hard to come by in the constantly bustling, chain-restaurant-addled downtown. It's a real escape and would make for a great place to meet the gang after work, where everyone can choose their own dish but meet in the separate bar section to catch up before a show.
The wine selection is small, but very well curated - in fact, it's the judicious curating of everything, especially the choice of restaurants, that will keep me coming back for more. Eaton Centre, 705 Ste-Catherine St. W.; timeoutmarket.com/montreal The most fun: Le Central The prize for greatest expression of Montreal's unique vibe goes to Le Central, at Ste-Catherine St. and St-Laurent Blvd.
Fun radiates from this place, thanks to a design that's eclectic and personalized to each eatery, featuring a range of materials - from solid wood sharing tables to '50s-style red plastic chairs. The irregular distribution of the 25 food counters - or, in cases like Pintxo, full-on restaurant spaces - gives it the feel of a permanent food truck meet-up. (First Fridays all year round - my dream!) When I visited, kids filled the place, running and exploring all the options before returning to the enormous tables in the central space, making it clear it's a very family-friendly experience with a vibrant and festive atmosphere.
The options include Mignonette's alluring raw bar, Misoya's ramen, Portuguese chicken from Emilia, delicious dosa from Le Super Qualité, Thai-Laotian yums from Thip Thip and Chinese fried chicken from Ho Lee Chix. My meal from Bonita's Taco & Deli was an extremely affordable ray of sunshine on a grey winter's day: a vegan carnitas taco made from wonderfully meaty-textured enoki mushrooms and a beefy barbacoa taco, dry-spiced and so fragrant, topped with fresh onion and cilantro and served with a juicy orange wedge to squeeze over. For dessert, I highly recommend the chocolatey Blizzard from Trou de Beigne.
Bon appétit! 30 Ste-Catherine St. W.; lecentral.ca

