No hiding in the storm drain for these clowns, as the Montreal Clown Festival breaks out the balloons for its fourth year at Mainline Theatre (from Wednesday to Sept. 22).
It all starts with artistic directors Vanessa Rigaux and Kendall Savage valiantly proffering their own mugs as targets for pie throwers at an opening event (pies available by donation). After that, it's cabarets, a talent competition, roundtable discussions and workshops all the way, plus, of course, a veritable clown car of acts careening across five days of mayhem.
If you're already groaning at the prospect of a coulrophobic's fever dream of party clowns and burger-chain mascots swarming toward you, think again. This is a festival that looks to the outer limits of the clown universe.
Take, for instance, the Mainebased Amanda Huotari, whose bouffon show, Pretty Face: An American Dream (Friday and Sept. 22), takes a savage swipe at current U.S. politics - though, you might think the unending buffoonery coming out of the White House makes for impossible-to-beat competition.
"You cannot be more absurd than the most absurd man on the planet," Huotari agrees during a telephone chat with the Montreal Gazette. "Although the show circles around him, like a sharpie around Alabama on a map, I never actually say his name, which is a conscious choice. Because, my goodness, the man says it enough and we don't need to hear it any more. So the show's really looking to turn the spotlight off of him and turn it back on us."
For those who have never experienced the grotesque and dangerous thrills of a bouffon act, Huotari gives us an idea of what to expect, or rather what to unexpect.
"The (traditional) red-nose clown goes onstage anticipating that the audience will laugh at the clown," she says. "The bouffon goes on stage to laugh at the audience. But it's also essential that the bouffon doesn't alienate them and continues to hold their love, like the jester who's mocking the king with their life at stake. I love that together we are going to find the edge of our comfort zone. There's an atmosphere that anything can happen."
Huotari's bouffon persona is just one example of the wild diversity of the festival, which this year features everything from a hospital clown to a zany flamenco dancer to an Indigenous clown troupe of eco-warriors, and ranges from absolute beginners to Cirque du Soleil veterans.
"What we're trying to do with this festival is mix all these genres," says Savage, who founded the festival with Rigaux. "I've been made more aware over the last four years of what clowning can be, all the different clowns that are out there."
Says Rigaux: "A lot of our audience are themselves practising clowns. You can learn as much from watching as from performing. You shouldn't be deterred from seeing beginners'shows because that's the brilliance of clowns, that they can constantly surprise you."
Rigaux and Savage are talking to the Montreal Gazette in the Old Port's Tommy Café, which also happens to be the venue where the pair first hatched the idea for the festival more than five years ago. It's an origins story that itself has more than a touch of clownishness about it.
"We had a great first meeting and got along fabulously," Rigaux says. "It was only at the end of the meeting when Kendall said, 'So, I have a confession to make, I thought I'd actually texted the other Vanessa clown, Vanessa Kneale of Les Bunheads.'We thought, OK, well, we'll roll with that accident."
Though they haven't yet performed in the festival, both Kendall and Rigaux are trained clowns. Rigaux was taught by the legendary French teacher Philippe Gaulier, whose past students include Sacha Baron Cohen and Emma Thompson. Savage is currently making waves on the Toronto improv scene.
At one point, Rigaux jokingly apologizes for "clownsplaining," which sounds like the most appealingly kooky way of getting your information. In fact, let's end with nuggets of clown wisdom.
Savage: "A clown has a very small brain but a very big heart. Even when Charlie Chaplin is in a snowstorm and eating that shoe, he's going to make the best of it. It's going to be the best shoe he's ever eaten."
Rigaux: "At different points of history we need different things, and I think the clowns can alleviate a little bit of the pain. We're at a time in history again when we're like, oh, the world's going to end. So the question is: who's going to get the last laugh?" WHAT TO SEE This year, for the first time, the festival is aiming a show specifically at kids with Just Enough, an adaptation of a Yiddish folk tale from Lost & Found Puppet Company. It happens on Sept. 21 at 2 p.m.
Iman Lizarazu's one-woman show Basquette Quese (Thursday and Sept. 21) is about an insomniac clown doing everything she can to fall asleep. It features routines that defy the laws of gravity, which is ironic, given Lizarazu started out as an astrophysicist.
One-time Cirque du Soleil clown Jesse Buck also makes play out of bedtime with Bubkus (the Yiddish word for "nothing"), in which he creates an epic fairy tale with just a pillow, blanket and toothbrush. It plays on Thursday and Sept. 21.
On Friday and Sept. 22, there's a triple bill featuring Alicia Payne's A Parody; Jo Jo Rideout Under Construction; and a duo called Bad Clown and Shirley acting out a certain famous banquet scene in Macbeth BBQ: Une tragédie clownesque vegétarienne.
And there's another triple bill on those same days with Toronto's Hercinia Arts Collective sending up synchronized swimming in Money Fish; Roccio Vadillo combining clowning and flamenco in Vous Étes Ici; and Étienne Bordeleau causing chaos in a waiting room with L'attente.
A double bill on Sept. 21 and 22 sees Indigenous clowns Debajehmujig ("storytellers" in the Cree and Ojibway language) performing the eco-parable The Quest; and hospital doctor Philippe Thibaudeau trying to find a quiet corner in a cacophonous world in Bruit.
The Montreal Clown Festival is at Mainline Theatre, 3997 St-Laurent Blvd., from Wednesday to Sept. 22. Tickets for each show are $17; $12 for those 12 and under. Call 514-849-3378 or visit mainlinetheatre.ca Also happening this week is the Canadian première of Spun, Rabiah Hussain's acclaimed drama about two young British-Pakistani girls whose friendship is tested because of their different reactions to the 7/7 bombings in London. It's being put on by local Muslim company Silk Road Institute, and plays from Thursday to Sept. 28 as a guest production at Centaur Theatre, 453 St-François-Xavier. Call 514-288-3161 or visit centaurtheatre.
CREDIT: JIM BURKE;The Gazette

