People who are quarantined at home with COVID-19 are supposed to stay there, say public health authorities - unless their place is unbearably hot, that is.
"The basic idea is, yes, we are asking people to quarantine," said Dr. Maxime Roy, a public-health physician with Montreal's public health department on Monday. But there are people affected by COVID-19 who live in apartments or dwellings with no air conditioning, and when the temperature climbs as high as it has been every day since last Thursday, the heat can be dangerous.
In that event, going to an outdoor space in the shade can be "a life-saving behaviour," he said. "If it's 38 in your apartment and 31 in the shade of a tree, it makes sense to be in the shade of the tree.
"We are balancing two risks here.
I understand we told them to stay home - but if the house caught fire, we would not tell them to stay inside," Roy said.
"They tried cold baths or cold showers. They drank fluids. They have a wet T-shirt on. But it's suffocating inside," he said. "We are not welding their doors shut."
It's important to get outside to cool down - but there's a protocol to follow, he said. People affected by COVID-19 should don a mask before leaving the house, wash their hands after donning it, go only to an outdoor space, say to a park in the shade, and keep two metres of distance between themselves and anyone.
"We are telling them to stay away from people," Roy said.
And as they prepare to re-enter their homes, they should disinfect their hands with an alcohol-based gel before opening a common door or pressing an elevator button. Once back in their apartment, they should remove their mask and immediately wash their hands.
On Monday, Santé Montréal announced that it was "enhancing its intervention" in the face of the extreme heat.
The threshold for declaring a heat alert is when the average maximum temperature reaches 33 C and the average minimum temperature doesn't drop below 20 C for three consecutive days.
Based on analyses of historical data, this run of hot weather "is associated with an excessive number of deaths in the Montreal population," Roy said.
A heat wave in Montreal during the summer of 2018 took the lives of 66 Montrealers.
Older people are more vulnerable to heat, he said, as are small children: Who can forget the tragic stories of children forgotten in cars by distracted parents? Also more vulnerable are those with chronic illnesses, such as heart and lung problems, and people with mental-health problems - particularly those dealing with addiction.
The judgment of people consuming alcohol or other substances is altered - "and that may affect your decision-making, in terms of drinking water and seeking a cool place," Roy said.
Alcohol also has a dehydrating effect. And substance addiction sometimes goes hand in hand with mental-health problems - and medication for mental health-issues can affect the body's thermostat, he said.
"With every extreme heat episode, we observe deaths in people dealing with addiction." sschwartz@postmedia.com

