It took far longer than usual for Montreal to become a snow-and ice-covered wonderland, though we've certainly made up for lost time since Christmas. Still, let's spend "spring" break - March 2 to 10 - celebrating winter before it's over. Layer up, put on your warmest socks and go out and play.
SNOWSHOE AFTER DARK Les amis de la montagne promise to give up Mount Royal's secrets and beautiful views on their nighttime traditional snowshoe excursion. All that beauty and hot chocolate, too. Fridays and Saturdays at 6 p.m. $22, $17 for 12-to 15-year-olds, includes the use of snowshoes. If you have younger children or would rather have this experience during the day, Les amis offer guided snowshoe tours with a hot-chocolate break in the middle for age eight and up, every day during March break at 10:30 a.m. Registration is required. Beaver Lake Pavilion; lemontroyal. qc.ca.
DOG-DAY AFTERNOONS The dogsledding is just the beginning at Pointe-aux-Prairies nature park - or the end, depending on how you stagger your day.
If you are 15 or over, you can overnight at the park March 2, learning survival skills and a little bit about yourself and the forest. The next day - or another day - you can explore 8.4 kilometres of trails and peer into the woods to find dozens of species of birds. If you're very quiet, you might even see deer.
Crazy carpets are crazy fun behind the heritage chalet. If you forgot to bring your sled or carpet, you can rent one. Then haul yourself back up to the cabin between 1 and 4 p.m. to relax in an Adirondack chair in front of a fire. The park will even supply a cosy blanket.
The dogsledding is on March 9.
Most activities are free, but you must register for the overnight and for dogsledding at 514-280-6691. The park is vast; find the chalet at 14905 Sherbrooke St.
E. STICKY AND SLIPPY Pointe-à-Callière does not sugar-coat history, but it will coat it in maple syrup. A sugar shack set up outside the Old Montreal museum is hands-on, with games and a maple-sap-collecting challenge. There will of course be maple taffy tasting and marshmallows to roast. Tim Hortons knows a good opportunity when it sees one and will deploy its street truck to hand out free coffee, lattes and hot chocolate. 350 Place Royale; pacmusee. qc.ca.
You can then take a stroll along the water to the aerial park Voiles en voiles. Its climbing ropes and zip lines are shut down for the season, but the carousel is still spinning and the inflatables park has been turned into a snow-tubing paradise. There are also snow scooters, quadricycles and a small obstacle course. Kids can also try their hands at archery. March 4 to 10, 1 to 6 p.m.; $8.95, $29.95 per family; voilesenvoiles.com.
CAP-ST-JACQUES AFTER DARK Take a night hike at Cap-St-Jacques nature park with a naturalist to find owls and discover how trees prepare to sleep through the season, then gather around the campfire to hear stories and learn about southern Quebec wildlife - from their fur to their tracks. You can also learn how to build a shelter and light a fire on snow. Hikes are organized by the Groupe uni des éducateurs-naturalistes et professionnels en environnement.
Many of these activities require registration. Most are best for children age six and up. When there are fees, they are generally $7, or $21 for a family of two adults and three children. You must register by calling; check guepe.qc.ca for details, dates and phone numbers.
Every weekend, Bois de l'Équerre lends children snowshoes, sleds and walking sticks to explore 2.3 kilometres of groomed trails. The former piece of farmland was given over to nature in the mid-1900s and has become Laval's largest urban forest, at 225 hectares. A piece of ID and a deposit are required to borrow equipment. 49 Rang de l'Équerre, Laval; boisdelequerre.org; 450-624-9696.
A WHOLE OTHER KETTLE OF RAINBOWS All right, but you really want to stay indoors? That's OK, too. St. Patrick's Day is fast approaching and one wouldn't want to be caught off-guard.
The Musée des maîtres et artisans du Québec has it all worked out with magic kettle family workshops. The museum is in a beautiful old church in St-Laurent borough and is dedicated to Quebecers'handmade art. Non-leprechaun exhibits include Know-How, with pieces from stonecutters, watchmakers, weavers and dozens more; and From Masters'Hands, with furniture, forged objects and textiles. The kettle workshop is available to all museum visitors; supplies are provided. March 2, 3, 9, 10, 16 and 17, from 2 to 3 p.m.; $5 to $8; 615 Ste-Croix Ave.; mmaq.qc.ca.
The Montreal International Children's Film Festival runs the entire week of March break at Cinéma Beaubien, Cinéma du Parc and the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts. There are tons of films showing in French and English, plus activities and games throughout the week. $9 per ticket, or $80 for 10 tickets. 514-284-9388; fifem.com.
ANYTHING ELSE? The Montréal en lumière festival runs till March 3, with bright lights, games and activities downtown, and hosts Nuit Blanche overnight March 2. Nuit Blanche begins at 2 p.m. (it ends at 3 a.m.) and many child-friendly venues. See nuitblanchemtl.com.
Art Souterrain, wherein Montreal's underground city is handed over to artists, runs from March 2 to 24. See artsouterrain.com.
Montréal Joue, a games festival, runs till March 10. There are more than 300 events at libraries throughout the city, including video gaming, board games and role-playing. 514-473-1279; montrealjoue.ca. hjuhl@postmedia.com twitter.com/hjuhl
CREDIT: HAYLEY JUHL;The Gazette

