The mind is a wonderful thing.
Had the Montreal Canadiens squeaked into the playoffs and been swatted aside in four or five games by the powerful Tampa Bay Lightning, it would have made for a grumpy summer. Fans would grumble, reporters would grouse, the cesspool that is social media would stink like a garbage strike in a heat wave.
Instead, one magical night, one shootout triumph over the hated Toronto Maple Leafs and one scintillating game for 20-yearold Minnesota native Ryan Poehling, and the chilly spring air smells of roses and Stanley Cup dreams.
All this because of Poehling 3.5, the night the rookie centreman's debut dovetailed in beguiling fashion with legendary broadcaster Bob Cole's swansong, the kid scoring three goals in regulation (including the tying goal) and another to win it in the shootout (hence the .5, since the NHL has never quite figured out what to do with The Gimmick in statistical terms).
Just like that, the mood shifted.
It might be a frigid spring, with the forecast calling for freezing rain, light snow and temperatures around one degree as we approach mid-April, but the mood is decidedly sunny. Rather than spending the next six months taking potshots at GM Marc Bergevin and agonizing over Jonathan Drouin's scoring drought, backup goaltender Antti Niemi's failures and the dysfunctional power play, fans will now spend the summer in a state of high anticipation, awaiting October and the season when young master Poehling is unleashed on the NHL for a full campaign.
It's like that when you're on pace for a 246-goal season. Never mind the game against the Leafs was meaningless in terms of the standings and the playoffs. The Canadiens still missed the post-season despite a solid 96-point season, but what we will take into the off-season is Poehling getting the first goal of his career.
It won't always be like this for Poehling, but he's big, strong, involved and he has a scoring touch. In one game, he spent more time in close proximity to the goaltender than Max Pacioretty will spend in his entire NHL career.
All in all, a dazzling debut.
It was the perfect way to end a season that saw the Canadiens restore some lost pride, deliver more entertainment value than they have at any time since the 2014 playoffs and improve in the standings by 25 points.
All that is well and good. If they want the smiles to remain, Bergevin and owner Geoff Molson are going to need to try a little harder. As Global's Brian Wilde pointed out this weekend, enough with pocketing nearly $10 million a year in unused salary-cap space. That's fine when you aren't overpaying for free agents who can't get you to the promised land anyway - but when you get close, it's time to put that cash to work.
Despite the warm, fuzzy feeling left by that final game, the bottom line is that the Canadiens have missed the playoffs three of the past four seasons while resolutely refusing to go for broke. Enough. Now is the time. It will be a good summer for free agents, restricted and unrestricted. Artemi Panarin, Matt Duchene and Erik Karlsson can shift the needle considerably, even if you have to overpay to acquire their services.
There is a solid argument for targeting either Panarin, an unrestricted free agent with the Blue Jackets, or restricted free agent Mitch Marner with the Leafs. The Canadiens have the cap money to make an offer for Marner that free-spending Leafs GM Kyle Dubas simply can't match - thus hamstringing the Leafs and acquiring one of the league's most exciting and dangerous young players in a single stroke.
Panarin, on the other hand, would make it possible for the Canadiens to jettison Drouin by whatever means possible. There are times when you simply have to acknowledge you made a bad deal and move on and this is one of them. Perhaps Bergevin can persuade some other organization that they can turn Drouin's game around but even if he can't, losing Drouin is addition by subtraction.
Then we come to the powerless power play. There were some indications the man-advantage was beginning to function late in the season, but it was far too little, too late. The Canadiens finished with the second-worst power play in the league - and if you think it's because they traded P.K. Subban, his Nashville Predators was the only team that was worse.
No matter what players are brought in, power-play repair has to be the first item of business for the coaching staff because with even a mediocre power play, the Habs would have had a 100-point season and a secure spot in the playoffs.
So fix the power play. Go for broke in free agency. And remember with a smile the night the raw rookie lit up the Leafs. jacktodd46@yahoo.com
CREDIT: JACK TODD;The Gazette

