THE COMPLETE SERIES
Saturday: A metro for Montrealers, by Montrealers Tuesday: Before the metro Wednesday: How it was built Thursday: Expansion and unfilled promises, and the way ahead
TOCATCHUPONPREVI-OUSINSTALMENTS,ASWELLASTOVIEWVIDEOSANDGRAPHICS,GOTOMONTREALGAZETTE.COM/METRO50
It was built on time and on budget, and with an elegance and savoir faire that elevated a utilitarian means of transportation to a work of art. Half a century later, the distinctive architecture of each station remains. So, too, does the metro's unrealized potential. Even today, the underground network fails to reach wide swaths of the city it was designed to unite. Marian Scott and Jason Magder report. The idea of a metro on tires came from Paris. The idea of the subway as a showcase for art and architecture came from Moscow. But when the Montreal metro opened on Oct. 14, 1966, it was a uniquely local creation.
"I wouldn't call it a Quebec product, or a Canadian product. I would call it a Montreal product. It was really done by Montrealers," said Guy Legault, the city's assistant director of urban planning during the first phase of metro construction from 1962-67.
Fifty years after a million passengers filled the metro on its first weekend in operation - oohing and aahing over the cobalt blue trains and soaring stations with their colourful mosaics and stained-glass - Legault's passion for the underground transit system he helped create is undiminished.
"The metro is the most beautiful example of an urban institution. The metro glorifies the city. It's a gathering place. It's a place where people come together. The metro is extraordinary," said Legault, 84, who oversaw the architectural plans for the initial network.
Widely regarded as the greatest achievement of Mayor Jean Drapeau's 30-year reign (from 1954 to 1957 and 1960 to 1986), the tire-shod subway has become an indispensable feature of the city it has transformed in myriad and profound ways.
"It's difficult to even conceive of what we would be like if the metro had never been built," says Matthew McLauchlin, creator of the website metrodemontreal.com.
A court interpreter and social work student, McLauchlin, 34, launched his website on the metro on Oct. 14, 2001 - his birthday as well as that of the subway.
"I think that there's something about a metro system that really puts it at the heart of the experience of any city," said McLauchlin. "It's really striking to me that so much attention had been paid to the esthetics of something that so many people use every day," he said.
"I was also struck by how much of it went unperceived and so my website always has been an effort to get people to take a second look and really appreciate what they pass by every day," McLauchlin added.
The metro reshaped and reinvigorated downtown Montreal, breathing new life into public transit in an era when the car was king. It led to the 32-kilometre underground city, where Montrealers shop and stroll, sheltered from cold and blizzards.
As hard as it might be to believe today, in a city notorious for corruption and construction delays, it was built economically and remarkably quickly - coming in on time and on budget. At $213 million ($1.6 billion in today's dollars), the initial 26-station subway was one of the world's least expensive to build, mainly because of its narrow-gauge trains, which allowed smaller tunnels.
And it did all that with an elegance and savoir faire that elevated a utilitarian means of transportation to a work of art.
"The French-English difference? Here it is," raved Canadian Magazine, then a weekend supplement in the Montreal Gazette and other newspapers, praising the stylishness that set the metro apart from the Toronto subway, whose stations looked like "big, sterile 'bathrooms.'"
"The Montreal metro is a subway with a difference, featuring among other things rubber-tired blue coaches and wild mosaic stations of which no two are alike," reported United Press International.
"An unexpected malady" swept the city in the week after the metro opened, Canadian Press wrote.
"It's Metro Love or 'l'amour immodere du Metro,' as a Montreal Transportation Commission official calls it," said CP, reporting on the capacity crowds milling in the new subway.
While cities like Stockholm and Lisbon are renowned today for their stunning subways, Montreal led the western world in making the metro an architectural showcase. At the time, only the Soviet Union, where Moscow's magnificent subway stations are veritable
palaces of the people, had taken such a decorative approach. "We were among the first to conceive of the entire station as an esthetic experience," McLauchlin said.
Half a century later, the distinctive architecture of each station remains Legault's proudest achievement. As second-in command to then-urban planning director Claude Robillard, it was he who came up with the idea of a different architect to design each station (with some doing two or more widely separated stops).
"Bringing in architecture was a mark of progress," Legault says.
"We were no longer provincial people. We weren't people who patted ourselves on the back just because we were able to move earth and rock. We had taken it up a notch."
When Drapeau and his righthand man, Lucien Saulnier, were elected on Oct. 24, 1960, plans for a subway had been on the drawing board for more than 50 years.
The flamboyant Drapeau, for whom no grandiose vision was too extravagant, and the practical, efficient Saulnier were the dream team that would finally turn the proposal into reality.
"Saulnier made all the difference and reined in the unbridled enthusiasm of Mayor Drapeau," Legault said.
Contrary to popular opinion, Saulnier, not Drapeau, was the father of the metro, he said.
"There are some urban legends about the metro that have to be cleared up. In fact, we owe the metro not to Jean Drapeau, but to Lucien Saulnier," he said.
Enamoured with glamorous projects that would put the city on the world map, Drapeau was initially reluctant to commit to the metro. He was an ardent proponent of freeways, seeing public transportation - including tramways, which had been eliminated from Montreal's streets by 1959 - as a relic of the past. But Saulnier, a small businessman raised in the Villeray district, was a firm believer in public transit. He had agreed to become Drapeau's running mate in the 1960 election on the condition they build a subway if elected, Legault said.
"There's no doubt that when the metro project became popular, Drapeau, who never missed an opportunity, rallied behind it and became its promoter. People think it was Drapeau's idea, but that's wrong," he said.
Another popular myth is that the metro was built because of Expo 67, Legault said.
In fact, construction of the metro was already underway when Montreal was awarded the 1967 world's fair in late 1962, after Moscow backed out.
However, Expo did affect the plans, eliminating a line that would have run under Mount Royal to Cartierville and Montreal North and adding the yellow line to Ile Ste-Helene and Longueuil.
Construction started on May 23, 1962. The initial network - nearly 40 per cent of today's 68 stations - was completed within five years, in time for Expo.
The metro was ideally suited to the city's densely populated neighbourhoods, built before the advent of the car, Legault said.
"To build a subway, you need a certain population density," he said.
"Montreal is one of the rare cities in North America that has a very high population density (in the centre), " he added.
"The metro is not a type of construction you can easily do in a suburb."
Saulnier was a meticulous manager who kept costs under control, Legault said. "It was expertly managed. The construction of the metro was carried out on schedule and within the budget - something that no longer exists in Montreal," he said.
While it cost $1.6 billion in today's dollars to build the initial network, the STM paid $1.2 billion for 468 new AZUR metro cars, and is spending another $1.2 billion to adapt the metro system for them.
For know-how, rather than turning to the United States or Toronto - which had opened its subway in 1954 and had 38 stations by 1966 - Drapeau looked to Paris, whose metro had recently pioneered trains with tires as opposed to noisy steel wheels.
"I think that in Drapeau's mind, the idea was to seek out expertise in old Europe, where they have experiences and a culture that are different from the Americans," Legault said.
While the mayor's preference for French expertise would later end disastrously when he hired architect Roger Taillibert to design the Olympic Stadium, a white elephant that left taxpayers saddled with a $1.5-billion debt, the idea of a metro on tires was a winner.
Montreal saved on tunnelling costs because the metro's narrowgauge cars could run in a smaller tunnel that didn't require support beams between tracks, and could handle steeper grades than traditional steel rails.
By tunnelling underground instead of digging trenches for the metro as in Toronto, planners were able to leave densely populated inner-city neighbourhoods intact, Legault noted.
Instead of running subway lines directly underneath major commercial arteries like Ste-Catherine and St-Denis Sts., they were located a block away to avoid disrupting businesses. "It would have destroyed Ste-Catherine St. (to build the metro directly underneath)," Legault said.
Thus, the Green Line runs under de Maisonneuve Blvd. - a street created in 1966 by joining Western, St-Luc, Burnside, part of Ontario and de Montigny Sts. - while the Orange Line runs under Berri St.
While subways in other cities exit to the sidewalk, that wasn't an option in Montreal because the sidewalks are narrower and the weather is worse, Legault said.
Modernistic metro entrances, or "edicules," became a familiar part of Montreal's streetscapes. In the downtown core, metro stations sparked highrise construction, as buildings were added atop them.
The underground city is another byproduct of the metro - one that planners foresaw and promoted, Legault said. The push to connect major downtown buildings by underground passages coincided with the opening of Place Ville Marie in 1962 - whose underground shopping mall was the city's first. "To connect that to the metro was Nirvana," he said.
Today, with no new metro construction since 2007, when the subway was extended to Laval, it's hard to conceive of planning and executing a project of such magnitude as the metro in just six years. Part of what made it possible then is that fewer players were involved, said Benoit Clairoux, a historian at the Societe de transport de Montreal (STM) and author of Le Metro de Montreal: 35 ans deja (Hurtubise, 2001).
"At the time, it was incredibly simple. The city of Montreal decided to build a metro, one that would be almost exclusively on its territory, and that it would pay for itself, in theory, anyway. (Westmount helped pay for Atwater Station and the Quebec government paid for later extensions.) When you're the one who's doing the building, you're the one who decides and you're the one who pays, it goes fast," he said.
But the story of the metro is an unfinished one whose early promise may never be fulfilled, said Dale Gilbert, a metro historian and postdoctoral fellow at the Institut national de la recherche scientifique's Centre Urbanisation Culture Societe.
Designed for a densely settled city, which managed the original construction in-house, it is a mode of transportation ill suited to and prohibitively expensive for sprawling suburbs, which grew exponentially during and after the period after the metro opened.
"In the beginning, Jean Drapeau was in control. He paid 100 per cent of the costs and in his mind, it was a metro for Montreal, for Montrealers," Gilbert said.
In the 1970s, expansion plans degenerated into decades of political bickering, funding shortfalls and stalled extensions. Metro extensions became controversial as costs exploded and different municipalities and levels of government got involved.
Accusations flew that Montreal's metro-on-tires had been a poor choice because it cannot run above ground, a cheaper way to serve a sprawling metropolis. Montreal's regional transit authority butted heads with the Quebec government over a proposed metro extension to Mirabel airport - leading to a deadlock that caused the government to declare a moratorium on future metro expansion in 1976.
Fifty years after the metro opened, it still fails to reach wide swaths of the city it was designed to unite, including Montreal North and much of Notre-Dame-de-Grace.
A $5.5-billion private-public lightrail project for the Montreal region currently proposed by Quebec's pension fund, the Caisse de depot et de placement, would not be well integrated with the metro, connecting only at Central Station, a 10-minute walk to Bonaventure metro, noted Craig Townsend, an associate professor in the Department of Geography, Planning and Environment at Concordia University.
Without political will from the Quebec government, there is little hope for improvement, Gilbert said.
"The explosion of costs, moratoriums and the provincial government's hesitation all contributed to the fact that today we find ourselves with a metro system that never realized its full potential. " jmagder@postmedia.com twitter.com/JasonMagder mscott@postmedia.com twitter.com/JMarianScott
Credit: MARIAN SCOTT AND JASON MAGDER; The Gazette
Illustration CITY OF MONTREAL ARCHIVES / ; CITY OF MONTREAL ARCHIVES. / Construction debris is the only sign of the metro tunnel on Berri St., north of Roy St., in 1964. Tunnelling, instead of digging, left Montreal neighbourhoods largely intact.; DARIO AYALA / Guy Legault, photographed in the Peel station, was the city's assistant director of urban planning during the first phase of Montreal's metro construction from 1962 to 1967.

