Were you among the estimated half-million people who took part in the historic climate march in downtown Montreal on Sept. 27? Whether you were there or not, chances are, the choice was yours. However, many people with disabilities who wanted to be there that day did not have the freedom to make that choice. Essentially, the message they got - again - was: stay home.
There are many reasons why people with disabilities (PWD) would want to participate in the march, some of which might not be obvious to others. People with disabilities are generally poorer because they are excluded from the labour market and are more likely to live in dilapidated dwellings, often in polluted neighbourhoods. Their health is more fragile than that of the average population, making them more vulnerable to heat waves and smog. Sidewalks covered with snow banks and ice too often force them to stay home, sometimes for days on end.
In the absence of a fully accessible public transit system, many PWD called on the Société de transport de Montréal paratransit service to get to the climate march and back. They needed to provide the starting address - easy, since it was posted weeks in advance. But the address of where the driver would pick them up at the end was also needed. This proved more difficult. Community organizations tried for two weeks to get answers from groups involved with the protest, to no avail.
Some march organizers mentioned a specific departure point for their activists with reduced mobility, away from the main gathering in front of the mountain. Eventually they disclosed the location where to wait for return transportation, not too far from where the march was expected to end. But it was impossible to find out if the procession would interfere with paratransit minibus, taxi and minivan trajectories. (This also prevented many from going to work or school.)
Still, many PWD wanted to take to the streets to express their concern for the future of the planet and their desire to be part of the change. Armed with addresses to give to the paratransit services, 24 hours in advance, they booked online or by phone. And yet, a little later, PWD were informed their ride was cancelled precisely because of the difficult logistics related to the march.
Undaunted, some then chose an address farther away from the hypothetical perimeter of the march, or they rescheduled their arrival earlier and their departure later. Few succeeded with their bookings. Many paratransit users - activists, students, workers - were forced to stay home.
Who's to blame? The groups that organized the event without taking the realities of paratransit users into consideration? The Montreal police who demanded that the itinerary remain secret? The STM paratransit service that cancelled all trips within a huge perimeter and during an overly long period at the last minute? The City of Montreal, which is committed to becoming universally accessible, but that oversaw the whole thing as if PWD did not exist? The agglomeration council? The disastrous co-ordination and inadequate communications by all the stakeholders from whom we should expect much better? More than a month later, despite more efforts to reach out, we still don't have answers.
We expect explanations and commitments to implement effective solutions going forward. And we expect to be consulted. Because there will be other climate marches, and we want to have the choice to participate in them. Like everyone else. It is a question of exercising one's civic and democratic right. Signatories: Independent Living - Montreal (IL-M), Action des femmes handicapées de Montréal (AFHM), Quebec Association for Equity and Inclusion in Post-Secondary Education (AQEIPS), Confédération des organismes de personnes handicapées du Québec (COPHAN), Mouvement des personnes handicapées pour l'accès aux services (PHAS) and Moelle épinière et motricité Québec (MÉMO-QC).
CREDIT: The Gazette

