Quebec ski hills have been suffering from what they call sidewalk syndrome - when local skiers see green lawns and bare sidewalks and elect to stay home.
"I got pictures from Mont Sutton today, and it looks like a picture perfect Christmas over there, but sitting in Montreal you can't imagine that this could be the case," said Yves Juneau, the CEO of the Quebec Ski Area Association.
Despite an abundance of snow in early November that saw many hills opened at 100 per cent in the early season, operators are no
w in consolidation mode, making snow, spreading it out with grooming machines and hoping for more wintry weather.
"We were off to a fantastic start with a cold month of November and tons of snow," Juneau said. "This is something we don't see often."
However, a thaw last week, and a day of rain forced many ski hills to close for a day or two to save the snow they have, and then reopen with artificial snow.
Most area ski hills are now reporting hard-packed surfaces, but Juneau said the fact there has not been a major snowfall in more than a month is merely a perception problem.
"Snow (in the city) is a great marketing campaign, but what we really need is sustained cold temperatures so we can make snow," he said. "That's why you see Mont St-Bruno (which is the closest hill to Montreal) has close to 100 per cent of its trails open. Even though we had that thaw, we were able to bounce back because of snow making."
The freezing rain, rain and warm temperatures in the forecast for most of the province on Friday is decidedly bad marketing, Juneau conceded. Still, he said he doesn't believe the wet weather will put a huge damper on ski conditions.
"When you're at 3,000 feet in altitude, like in Mont Tremblant, I can pretty much guarantee the mountain will get some snow even though at the base it will be liquid precipitation," he said.
Juneau said the Christmas to New Year's period is critical for ski hills, accounting for about 25 per cent of the season's business. Ski hills that are also vacation resorts, like Bromont or Mont Tremblant, have been faring better, because they don't depend as much on the whims local skiers, relying instead on people who book their ski vacations weeks or months in advance.
He said frigid temperatures at the same time last year were probably more difficult for ski hill operators, who saw a 20 per cent decline over the previous year.
There could be some good news on the horizon for skiers, as Environment Canada is forecasting snow for New Year's Eve on Monday.
Environment Canada meteorologist Alexandre Parent said there will be freezing rain in the Montreal area, but areas north of the city should just see snow. "In the Laurentians, it's not impossible to have 10 to 15 centimetres of snow, but it's too soon to tell," Parent said. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder
WHAT'S OPEN AND CLOSED NEW YEAR'S
The following is a selection of Montreal-area services and businesses that will be available (or not) during the holidays:
Canada Post offices: There will be no delivery Jan. 1. Normal post-office hours will resume Jan. 2.
Banks will be closed Jan. 1 and 2.
Most city offices are closed until Jan. 2, inclusive. This includes all borough and Accès Montréal offices.
Most shopping malls and stores will close at 5 p.m. on Dec. 31 and stay closed on Jan. 1.
Public markets will close at 5 p.m. on Dec. 31, and stay closed Jan. 1 and 2.
Société des alcools du Québec outlets will close at 5 p.m. on Dec. 31 (but SAQ Express stores will be open until 7 p.m.) and reopen at 1 p.m. on Jan. 2.
Société québécoise du cannabis (SQDC) outlets will remain open Thursdays through Sundays during the holidays.
Quebec government offices will be closed from Dec. 31 to Jan. 2.
All federal government offices in Quebec will be closed Jan. 1.
Garbage, recycling and large-item pickups vary according to borough schedules. Check with your borough because many pickups are cancelled or delayed. Visit ville.montreal.qc.ca/infocollectes for more information.
Ecocentres are closed until Jan. 2.
The Montreal Municipal Court (775 Gosford St.) will close Dec. 31 and reopen Jan. 3. Other service counters will follow the same schedule. The service counters will also close from Dec. 31 to Jan. 2.
Montreal arenas, swimming pools, sports centres, libraries and cultural venues will use holiday schedules set by the boroughs. For information, visit ville.montreal.qc.ca or call 311 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.
The Insectarium, Botanical Garden and Planetarium Rio Tinto stay open through the rest of the holiday period. The Biodôme is closed for renovations until spring 2019. Visit espacepourlavie.ca for more information.
Société de transport de Montréal bus lines will operate on a holiday schedule Jan. 1-2. The métro will run all night on New Year's Eve. Consult schedules at stm.info/en or call 514-288-6287.
Société de transport de Laval buses will run on a reduced Sunday schedule Jan. 1, and Saturday service Jan. 2. Service is free on Dec. 31. Visit stl.laval.qc.ca for more information.
Most Réseau de transport de Longueuil buses will run on a Saturday schedule Dec. 31 and Jan. 2, and a Sunday schedule on Jan. 1. For a list of exceptions, visit rtl-longueuil. qc.ca.
Exo, formerly the Réseau de transport métropolitain, will offer free service on all commuter trains, buses and adapted transport Dec. 31 and Jan. 1. Trains will run on a regular schedule Dec. 31, and a Sunday schedule on Jan. 1 and 2, except the Deux-Montagnes line, which has a special holiday schedule. For more information, visit exo.quebec.
Parking meters remain in operation. All restrictions must be obeyed.
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

