Djemira de Pagter lived through the 1998 ice storm and was en route to Dawson College during the 2006 shooting.
But the toughest time of her life was a March evening in 2017 when she was stranded overnight in her vehicle during a blizzard that walloped Montreal with nearly 40 centimetres of snow.
The massive snowstorm and a jackknifed tractor-trailer trapped about 300 motorists on a busy stretch of Highway 13 for many hours.
"I was there for about 11 hours," de Pagter, 32, recalled in an interview with the Montreal Gazette.
"I had almonds, a lollipop and half a chocolate bar for dinner. I had to keep getting out to get the snow off my tires and my windshield."
Many motorists were without food and water and slept in their cars in sub-zero weather. Some had to relieve themselves outside their vehicles. Others abandoned their cars and walked home in the heavy snow.
More than three years after the nightmare, she received a letter Friday saying financial compensation is on the way.
Stranded motorists, who were part of a successful class-action law suit against provincial agencies, will receive between $400 and $1,400 each.
"I don't know how much I'm getting, but it will be nice for Christmas," she said. "I have a medical condition and just had surgery."
Knowing that she would be facing a snowstorm that evening, de Pagter filled her gas tank and headed home to Lachine from her job in Anjou.
She ran into trouble on Côtede-Liesse Rd. because plows had failed to clear the fast-falling snow.
Her father, who had just collected his wife from Trudeau airport, suggested his daughter take Highway 13 because there had been a snowplow in front of his vehicle.
But as she headed south on Highway 13, traffic slowed and eventually ground to a halt about four kilometres from the exit to Highway 20.
Trucks blocked the highway and Transport Quebec didn't send plows in time. Tow trucks couldn't get through and finally the fire department was called in. Many motorists called 911 in tears, pleading for help.
A government investigator blamed Transport Quebec and the Sûreté du Québec for the Highway 13 fiasco. There was also poor management that night and subcontractor Roxboro Excavation had failed to clear snow and spread abrasives, the investigator wrote.
As a trained nurse, de Pagter said she managed to stay relatively calm as the hours dragged on.
She chatted on the phone with her boyfriend and started a livestream on Facebook to share the ordeal.
"At (one stage), I started screaming and banging on the steering wheel because I was hungry and had to go to the bathroom."
Around 5 a.m., cars started moving in front of her.
De Pagter had to drive around several abandoned vehicles and eventually made her way to a McDonald's, where she bought a cheeseburger.
But when she arrived outside her apartment in Lachine, she was forced to dig a parking spot in fivefoot-high snowdrifts.
"I was exhausted," she said.
"There were snowplows passing me and no one stopped to help me."
When she finally entered her apartment, more than 12 hours after leaving work, she barely had enough energy to crawl into bed.
"I was so tired, I didn't even eat," she said. kwilton@postmedia.com

