Birds, bees, foxes and wildflowers might not be the first thing you picture when thinking of the St-Laurent borough in Montreal's north end.
After all, 70 per cent of its territory is industrial and commercial. The lower quadrant stretches from the parking lots of the Ikea outlet to the runways of Trudeau airport. Bombardier, Siemens and Ericsson have sprawling campuses. Criss-crossed by wide boulevards, highways and rail yards, it will soon host a compost facility.
But the borough is taking steps to protect plant, animal and insect life in an environment that is 82 per cent concrete jungle. On Wednesday, it unveiled a master plan for biodiversity that will link up various natural spaces like the Bois de Saraguay, Bois de Liesse and Parc Marcel-Laurin woodlands along a hydro corridor to be planted with crucial vegetation.
Borough mayor Alan DeSousa says it's a first in Montreal and Quebec and will help preserve delicate ecosystems that have been fragmented by human development, combat the heat island effect and address the climate emergency.
"It's not just a re-greening process," he said. "If we want to protect these natural spaces, you have to find ways of linking them. You want to have bees, you want places for the birds, you want room for the foxes."
It will also include pathways and green space for humans.
The move comes amid grim news locally and globally. This month, a landmark United Nations report found economic development and resource exploitation could drive one million species to extinction, with devastating consequences.
An earlier study from the International Panel for Climate Change warned the worst effects of global warming will be felt sooner and at a lower temperature increase than previously believed. A federal government analysis revealed Canada is warming at twice the rate of other parts of the world and three times as fast in the Arctic.
The effects of climate change are hitting home, with this spring's terrible flooding (the second bout in three years) and last summer's killer heat wave. A report from Montreal public health authorities last week found 66 people died from the heat, 13 more than initially counted, and that the mortality rate was higher in neighbourhoods with the fewest trees and parks.
By now it should be readily apparent that protecting the environment is as much about preserving human health and building resilient cities that will withstand the challenges to come.
Cities are often the ones taking the lead. On Wednesday, Paris announced it will green a 100-acre area around the Eiffel Tower that is now mostly concrete. The United Kingdom is on a mission to plant one million trees by 2022, while London is creating a seven-mile wildflower corridor or "bug highway" through the city to support declining insect populations.
Although St-Laurent's announcement came on International Day for Biological Diversity, the project has been years in the making. It involved consultation with urban planners, landscape architects, biologists, environmentalists and residents. The plan was also the subject of an international design competition.
De Sousa said that through the process, he learned about foxes having their litters in dens in small stands of trees - one example of the life-sustaining role of woods, wetlands and streams even in St-Laurent's heavily industrialized technoparc. But even as we are learning about the crucial importance of nature, these ecosystems are fragile and under threat.
"The corridors we're trying to create are not just terrestrial, but aerial and hydraulic," he said. "Animals don't just walk, they fly and swim."
While the initial leg of the biodiversity belt will be on public land - a hydro right-of-way - De Sousa expects it will be expanded to private land as well. The master plan will guide urban planning and zoning decisions for decades to come.
At a cost of $500,000 so far and $1.8 million over the next three years, St-Laurent's biodiversity corridor comes as Montreal set aside a record $60 million in its 2019 budget to buy up remaining green spaces around the island to preserve them.
Still, Montreal's moves to fight climate change fell short of Luc Ferrandez's expectations. Out of frustration last week, he quit as head of parks on Mayor Valérie Plante's executive committee and as three-time Plateau borough mayor.
Even if they belonged to different parties, DeSousa said he respected Ferrandez's commitment to the environment and is sad to see him leave.
But DeSousa also hopes St-Laurent's biodiversity corridor will serve as "inspiration" for the city and region - the starting point of a larger initiative to reconnect important natural habitats throughout Montreal.
"It's something that can and should be replicated." ahanes@postmedia.com
CREDIT: ALLISON HANES;The Gazette

