There's a blizzard outside but I'm whizzing down an empty hallway on a refurbished red Velo Sport bicycle.
The original bike was built in the mid-'80s, but it has been equipped with new handlebars, wheels and fenders. The bike was recently assembled by Rebicycle, a non-profit organization that specializes in refurbishing older bikes.
Located on the sixth floor of an industrial building on de Gaspe St. in Mile End, Rebicycle has existed for about a year but will open for its first full season this spring. The white gallery-like showroom features prototype bikes and mechanics working on site. A colourful mural by local artist Jonathan Cormier captures the pure joy of a sunset bike ride in Montreal in the early summer. Customers can try out bikes in the hallway outside.
"The first thing we ask you is, 'What are you going to be doing with this bicycle?,' " explains Benjamin Adler, strategic adviser at Rebicycle.
With this information, Rebicycle helps customers choose a frame style and size, handlebars, determine whether they'd like (and can afford) vintage or new parts, and other details. Bikes start at around $300.
Each bike is built with a 71-point checklist by mechanics who, according to Rebicycle, are paid the highest base mechanic salary in Montreal, $15 per hour.
"One of the reasons we pay top dollar for our mechanics is that we want the best talent," says Adler. Each bike comes with a one-year warranty and a free tune-up any time during the first year.
"Somebody has to take the usedbike industry by the scruffof the neck and shake it and be like, 'You need to do things better,' " says Adler. "Basically, Rebicycle is trying to change the used-bike industry because we believe it leaves a lot to be desired right now. It's hard to tell where bikes come from, it's hard to know why people are charging you a certain amount."
The asking price for my red ride? $375. An invoice explains the cost breakdown, including new parts and the number of hours of labour it took to build it. It even tells you which mechanic put the bike together.
Rebicycle is also working with factories in Taiwan to custommanufacture parts like a brake that allows certain old bikes to accept a wider range of wheels, and halfmoon shaped handlebars.
With its detailed invoices, Rebicycle aims to take away some of the mystery in the used-bike industry. It also has a grander goal of tackling the endemic problem of stolen bikes, checking every one of its frames against the Canadian Police Information Centre registry, the national stolen goods database, and providing new owners with a certificate of purchase to prove this. Each bike also comes with a membership to Project 529, an online community that helps register and protect bikes.
So where do the majority of Rebicycle's frames come from? An exclusive agreement with Cyclo Nord-Sud, a Quebec charity that sends bikes to Africa and Central and South America, gives Rebicycle the opportunity to recuperate bikes the charity can't use.
Rebicycle also accepts donations. When Cyclo Nord-Sud visited warehouses in the recipient countries, it found the oldest bikes, the vintage bikes, weren't being used. "These bikes are very hard to work on," explains Adler. "There are all kinds of obsolete and obscure tools that you need; you need specialized knowledge, the standards are not the same, you often have to deal with seized parts, which you don't have to worry about with as much with modern bikes."
Rebicycle accepts these challenges. "At the same time, in our opinion, these bikes were really built to last, while modern bikes, especially cheap modern bikes that you find at big-box stores, there's a lot of plastic on them and they're not made to last."
A lot of the frames - the vast majority of which were built in the '70s, '80s and early '90s - were made in Canada, in an era when our country still had a bike manufacturing industry.
"Our bikes are more made in Canada than a lot of the stuffyou can buy nowadays. And they've been reassembled with Quebecois labour, just like they were assembled with Quebecois labour in the first place in 1985."
For more information on Rebicycle, go to www.facebook.com/RebicycleMTL or email info@rebicycle.ca.
Credit: VANESSA BONNEAU; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Benjamin Adler says the refurbished bike frames at Rebicycle make use of parts that might otherwise go to waste. 'Rebicycle is trying to change the used-bike industry,' says Adler.

