A massive winter storm that lashed Southern Ontario this week moved through Quebec and into the Maritimes on Wednesday, closing schools, restricting travel and shuttering many businesses and offices for the day.
Few areas were spared as activities across much of Eastern Canada were disrupted, from the Dennis Oland murder trial to outdoor events at Quebec City's winter carnival.
"It's been a long day," said Troy Arsenault, who fought a losing battle as he cleared snow from the steps in front of Fredericton's Beaverbrook Art Gallery Wednesday.
"It's our third time here ... the wind keeps blowing the snow right back to where we've cleared it."
Jill Maepea, a meteorologist with Environment Canada, said much of New Brunswick was expecting close to 35 centimetres of snow from the storm by Wednesday night, with more on the way.
All of New Brunswick and P.E.I., and much of Nova Scotia and Southern Quebec were under similar winter-storm warnings.
Areas of western Nova Scotia also received heavy snow Wednesday morning, but weather in much of the province had changed over to freezing rain or rain by midday. Environment Canada said winds could also gust to 80 kilometres an hour and combine with freezing rain to make travel treacherous.
Schools and universities in almost all of the region were closed or delaying their openings, along with some government offices and businesses. The courts in Saint John opened as scheduled Wednesday morning, but closed at noon because of the blizzard, adjourning Mr.Oland's retrial in his father's killing for the day.
Airports in Fredericton, Halifax and Charlottetown were reporting dozens of flight cancellations, a day after the scene played out in Toronto where there were mass flight disruptions and widespread closings of schools, tourist attractions and non-essential municipal services. A "no-travel advisory" for New Brunswick highways was issued Wednesday.
Al Giberson, general manager of MRDC - the company responsible for the stretch of TransCanada Highway between Fredericton and Moncton - said snow was accumulating as fast as four to five centimetres an hour.
"The real challenge though is the heavy snowfall, and the wind that has come with it, has made visibility very poor. Driving conditions are very treacherous," Mr. Giberson said.
Much of Southern Quebec also remained under a winter-storm warning after about 30 centimetres of snow fell in Montreal, forcing the closing of schools and major travel disruptions.
In Quebec City, the weather was bad enough that even the winter carnival was forced to close its outdoor activity sites Wednesday. Organizers said the temporary shutdown was necessary to ensure the "safety of everyone."
Between 20 and 40 centimetres of snow were expected to fall in Quebec depending on the region, with strong winds reducing visibility on some roads to almost zero. Several highways were closed Wednesday morning, including Highway 20 in both directions between Lévis and Montmagny.
Credit: THE CANADIAN PRESS

