We've finally discovered what climate change really means: that our climate changes every day.
We went from a Saturday blizzard to a Sunday slush storm to a Monday ice storm to a balmy Wednesday to an "extreme cold warning" Thursday with a wind chill of -43.
We lived through the weather extremes of a whole winter in six days.
Not to mention a blizzard in early December followed by a crazy snow-free rest of the month. We have obviously entered a strange new weather system that I call: The bipolar vortex. This new continual-climatechange winter is a challenge even for hardened Montreal winter warriors, who need all their wiles just for:
WALKING: With rapidly shifting bipolar conditions, you must adroitly choose the correct walking style for every moment.
On Monday, Ste-Catherine St. sidewalks were treacherous skating rinks - and many downtowners were using the ice slither walk. In this manoeuvre, you never actually lift your feet from the ground while walking - you plant one foot flatly on the icy pavement, then slither carefully onto the other.
Veteran Montrealers can walk pretty fast this way, shuffling down slippery streets like penguins.
A different walking style was needed Tuesday night when fresh snow concealed the sidewalk ice. This required the minefield tiptoe, where you delicately place one foot down to see if it's safe, then tiptoe another baby step, crossing the sidewalk like a soldier in a minefield.
There's also the snowbank stepand-test technique, where you prod a snowbank with your toe before putting your weight on it. Is it rock-hard and slippery - or does it collapse into slush, shooting nine inches of water into your boot?
Those who walk incorrectly wind up in emergency wards that have been overwhelmed with concussions, frostbite and fractures in the last week - victims of bipolar winter combat.
Part of the problem is that many seniors in their 80s insist on going outside however wacky the weather. I'm proud of them - these are real Montrealers who won't take snow for an answer.
It's time someone gave them a helping hand by developing lightweight winter body armour - like skateboarders wear - to protect their artificial hips, replaced knees and arthritic elbows, shoulders and bums.
As well, we should provide them with the world's first padded and heated pedestrian helmets for winter - and our hospital wards would be calm.
DRIVING: is also tricky in the bipolar vortex, because you don't know whether a snowbank is made of feather-light fresh snow or rock-hard, rain-drenched snow - until you back into it and bounce offlike it's a granite wall.
Then again, last Sunday I was driving through giant slush puddles on the Metropolitan when a towering tsunami of slush leaped over the 12-foot lane divider like a tidal wave and engulfed my car - flinging it into the next lane, where it somehow surfed its way to safety.
EXERCISE: is easy to get this winter, because daily life is enough exercise. Think of your workout: Getting dressed: 100 calories, plus 175 cal. per child you dress. Trudging to car 150 cal., scraping windshield 125, prying open iceencrusted door 130, shovelling out car 600 and brushing giant cake of snow offroof 500.
There. You've had your whole day's exercise, and you haven't even started pushing out the car.
STREET CLEARING: Our confused weather has confused Montreal snow crews, too. On Wednesday a spokesman for the city admitted crews had all been out with snowblowers when the real problem was a mini-ice storm had left sidewalks like glass.
The city has now pledged to adapt to the changing climate with a new rapid-response strike force that will salt our sidewalks as fast as they freeze.
I'll believe that when I don't fall on them - but let me make another suggestion. At Jeanne-Mance Park when you get offthe 80 bus, the stairs down through the park to Esplanade Ave. are immaculately shovelled. But you can't get to them, because the 20-foot stretch from the street to the stairs looks like something from the ice age - a field of glacial ice with jutting icicles and stalagmites so primeval you expect to meet a sabre-toothed tiger.
After picking my way across it and vowing "never again," I saw a blue-collar guy diligently cleaning the steps and suggested he salt the area leading to them.
He shrugged and said: "I've been doing these stairs for 10 years, sir, and no one in the city has ever mentioned cleaning that area."
I suspect there are thousands of small shovel-free zones like this in Montreal that have fallen through the bureaucratic cracks, where pedestrians dread to tread.
But this weekend, relax - the bipolar vortex is stable and on lithium for three days. However, there's an alert in effect for a sandstorm on Tuesday. Joshfreed49@gmail.com
Credit: JOSH FREED; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / With streets covered in ice, anyone who tried walking normally on Monday was living dangerously.

