Mayor Valérie Plante is proud so many Montrealers have gone to get tested for COVID-19 in recent days, but says the long wait times at testing sites in the city are "unacceptable."
The number of people trying to get tested in Montreal exploded after the city's public health department called on anyone who has been to a bar since July 1 to be tested.
But Plante said Wednesday she doesn't understand how that call could be issued without the proper resources first being in place. The mayor said the city has offered to find new testing sites and even deploy mobile testing clinics again, but added there isn't much more it can do from there.
"There needs to be personnel, nurses and doctors, to operate the clinics," she said. "The city of Montreal can't do that. When you put out a call for testing, you need to be able to test."
The city's public health department announced Wednesday a new walk-in testing clinic will open at Outremont's borough offices Thursday afternoon. The clinic will be open to everyone, but is mainly for people between the ages of 15 and 29 who have been to a bar.
The hope is the clinic could help shorten wait times experienced over the weekend, especially at the Hôtel Dieu testing site, where people stood in line for several hours to get tested.
Speaking to reporters in Rivièredu-Loup on Wednesday, Premier François Legault also denounced the long wait times. The premier said he has spoken to public health officials about the problem and expects the situation to be corrected. He said the province has the capacity to test 16,000 people daily, but is only at about 10,000 per day.
Legault also called on people to be "more disciplined" in bars. Dr. Richard Massé, of Quebec's public health department, said there are delays because some of the people working at the testing centres were sent back to their regular jobs when fewer people were showing up for tests. But local health authorities are working to get them back to the testing centres to be able to increase the number of people tested each day, he added.
"It takes some time to mobilize nurses and other technicians to support the screening activities," Massé said.
The first priority is to increase testing at Montreal's Hôtel Dieu site, he added. But as Plante alluded to, mobile testing clinics - specially outfitted city buses deployed at the height of the crisis - could also be brought back into service if needed.
Massé said there has been an increase in cases connected to indoor and outdoor gatherings and people going to bars and restaurants, mainly adults in their midto-late 30s.
According to Montreal's public health department, about three per cent of the 3,000 tests done over the weekend came back positive.
Earlier this month, the percentage of positive cases on the island was less than one per cent.
"It shows us that there is an increase in transmission and we have to intervene quickly," Massé said, adding that the percentage of positive tests is one of several indicators that public health officials are monitoring.
Earlier in the pandemic, the percentage of positive tests was higher, in the 15-to 20-per-cent range, he added.
Asked Wednesday whether she is worried about the uptick in cases in Montreal, Plante said the city has been discussing with the provincial government to make sure everything is in place to handle a potential second wave.
She said the province should be ready to focus on Montreal, seeing how badly the city has been hit during the pandemic.
"We've had it hard here in Montreal," Plante said. "It's still very difficult for merchants. (Thousands of) people have died. We were the epicentre. I do not want to live that again, and clearly Montrealers don't, either."

