Ghislain Parizeau of Croisieres Alouette in Ste-Agathe-des-Monts, about 100 km north of Montreal in the Laurentians, has a question for passengers boarding one of his boats for a cruise of Lac des Sables and a view of the splendid fall foliage: Have they noticed, he asks, the red maple leaf in the centre of the Canadian flag?
As the days shorten and the nights lengthen, many of Quebec's trees don their autumn palette of oranges and golds as well as the reds that evoke the flag's stylized 11-point maple leaf. The wardrobe change usually begins in September, with the colours appearing first in higher elevations. The rate and timing of the change vary from species to species, as do the colours: Oaks turn red, brown or russet, for instance, red maple becomes a brilliant scarlet and black maple goes a glowing yellow.
Among passengers joining the 50-minute tours on Parizeau's Alouette V or VI are international tourists, here from as far away as Europe or the Far East; many time their visits to coincide with the fall foliage. To him, viewing the colours from the water enhances the experience: The colours and the sky are reflected in the lake, "which is calm this time of year, sometimes almost like a mirror, especially in early morning and late afternoon."
Whatever your perspective, there's something spectacular about autumn in Quebec. One finds fall colour nearly anywhere in the province by mid-October, but the Laurentians north of Montreal, with their mountains, lakes and rolling hills, are among the most popular destinations for day-tripping leaf peepers.
A fall foliage map on the Quebec government tourism site (quebecoriginal.com/en-ca), updated every Thursday, tracks the progress of the season. Call Tourisme Quebec at 1-877-BONJOUR (266-5687) to learn where the colours are at their most glorious.
And check out the Tourisme Laurentides website for activities and events in the Laurentians - everything from ziplining or taking a helicopter ride for a bird's-eye view of the foliage to riding the chairlift at a ski hill or simply taking in the scenery on foot, on a bicycle or by car. Merely getting behind the wheel this time of year and heading north on Highway 15 virtually guarantees a scenic drive. Here are four suggested stops: Visit the small Laurentian town of Prevost, at Exit 55 off the 15. If you're there between Wednesday and Sunday, a lovely place for breakfast, brunch or lunch is the Bistro Merci la Vie bakery and cafe, 2988 Cure-Labelle Blvd. Also on Cure-Labelle, at 2480, find Les Sentiers Commemoratifs de la Riviere, a natural cemetery featuring two km of footpaths, flanked by the Riviere-du-Nord, a wooded park, several rest areas, a waterfall, a pond and a play area for children.
The graves, which are for funeral urns, are scattered in nature with flat stones marking grave sites and landscaping featuring plants native to the region.
The final edition for 2017 of the terrific Val-David Saturday summer market was Oct. 7, but the pretty little town is still worth a stop. Visit Kinya Ishikawa's studio and garden at 2435 rue de l'Eglise, 1001 Pots. Ishikawa is the founder of the hugely successful month-long 1001 Pots summer exhibition showcasing the work of potters; this summer it celebrated its 28th edition. Take Exit 76 off Highway 15 and Route 117 to Val-David. The 230-km-long P'tit Train du Nord linear park, a multiuse recreational trail that was once a railway track and is now used for biking, hiking and cross-country skiing, runs through Val-David.
For habitues, a trip to the Laurentians is not complete without a visit to the cosy Creperie Bretonne Au Tournesol, 5825 Labelle Blvd. in nearby Val-Morin (The address is listed as Val-David in some directories.) My favourite is their cheese and mushroom crepe - and the green salad is big enough for two. Closed Monday and Tuesday.
Ste-Agathe, about 100 km north of Montreal (Exit 86 off Highway 15), is where Mordecai Richler set his 1959 novel, The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz. Its downtown area features restaurants, bars and terrasses; the P'tit Train du Nord runs through its outskirts and Alouette cruises leave several times daily from the municipal dock at the end of Rue Principale.
In the vast Mont-Tremblant provincial park, trails in the Diable sector including La Roche, La Corniche and la Chute du Diable provide superb backdrops where "the colour makes its magic," said Annie Morrisseau, the park's head of client services. Highway 15 north merges just beyond Ste-Agathe with Route 117. Take Exit 107 off the 117 toward St-Faustin-Lac-Carre, continue toward Lac Superieur and follow signs to the La Diable registration centre. Park admission is $8.50 per person.
Gorgeous as the Laurentians are, you can take in the fall colours without leaving town. Mount Royal, of course, has its own beauty, and les Amis de la Montagne offer guided walking tours until the end of October.
Melanie Dappen, naturalist in charge of educational services for GUEPE, says her favourite place in the Montreal area to observe colourful fall foliage is the Boisde-Saraguay nature park in Ahuntsic-Cartierville. It's the newest in a network of nature parks administered by the City of Montreal. So far, Bois-de-Saraguay has only two km of trails, but there is a lot to see, including black maple and red oak. Enter from Jean Bourdon and Joseph Saucier Sts.
Nearby is the larger and more established Bois-de-Liesse Nature Park, featuring old-growth hardwood and forest surrounded by streams. It covers nearly 400 acres in the northwestern part of the island and extends through the Ahuntsic-Cartierville, Pierrefonds-Roxboro and St-Laurent boroughs.
WHY SOME AUTUMNS ARE MORE SPECTACULAR THAN OTHERS
Some years, Quebec's fall foliage dazzles; others, it is quieter.
"The main feature that controls when the colours change is what we call the photoperiod, or length of daylight," said Jim Fyles, associate dean for student affairs in McGill University's agricultural and environmental sciences faculty and Professor and Tomlinson Chair in Forest Ecology in the department of Natural Resource Sciences. "Most plants can detect the change from dark to light and light to dark, and the period between is a reliable indicator of how the season is progressing."
Daylight wanes at the same rate from one year to the next, but colour change is affected also by such factors as weather and soil moisture; like a great deal about nature, these are not entirely predictable.
"Trees don't stick to a calendar," observed Pascal Lynch Caron, head of communications, development and marketing for the organization of educators and naturalists in the city of Montreal's nature parks, the Groupe uni des educateursnaturalistes professionnelles en environnement (GUEPE).
Spectacular fall foliage requires a confluence of factors: a warm, wet spring, fine summer weather and warm and sunny fall days with cool, but above-freezing, nights. Spring in Quebec this year was not so warm, summer was wet and not so fine, and September had few cool nights: The unseasonably hot and humid weather and the lack of rain may have blunted the intensity of the colours.
By late September, for instance, much of the vibrant red foliage Laurentian resident Veronica Baruffati had observed earlier in the month had fallen from the trees around the lakeside community near Ste-Agathe she calls home, and the remaining foliage was "much more muted in colour than usual."
Colour change "is part of the senescence process, by which the trees prepare to go dormant for winter," Fyles explained. As the days grow shorter, production of the chlorophyll responsible for the green in leaves slows and eventually stops. As its concentration is reduced, other contents of the leaf become visible: Carotenoids, responsible for the yellows, are always there, but masked in summer by chlorophyll. Anthocyanins, which give colour to red apples, cherries and blueberries, are produced by sugars in the leaf. Sunny days are needed for what remains of the chlorophyll to produce those sugars, along with cool nights to keep them in the leaf.
"If a tree is under stress, it may senesce and turn colour earlier," Fyles said. "The tree is trying to retrieve nutrients from the leaves before they fall."
Because there was so much rain during the summer, "this year has been a bit strange ... I have seen colours changing in unexpected places over the past few weeks which I have attributed to trees that are stressed by having their roots flooded too much during the year," he said in an email in late September. "In a similar circumstance, we have had so little rain lately that some trees may turn colour early because they are stressed by lack of water."
sschwartz@postmedia.com Twitter: susanschwartz
Credit: SUSAN SCHWARTZ; The Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: JOHN MAHONEY / Beneath the backdrop of turning leaves, a car drives through Mont Tremblant Park earlier this month.; PHOTOS: JOHN MAHONEY / Croisieres Alouette owner Ghislain Parizeau pilots his boat taking tourists to see the changing colours of the leaves on trees surrounding Lac des Sables in Ste-Agathe.; JOHN MAHONEY / While fall colours are always a popular subject for photos, a deer at the side of the road can also cause traffic to slow and shutters to start snapping.; JOHN MAHONEY / Tourists take in the scenery and the changing leaves at Lac Chat in Mont Tremblant Park.; PHOTO COURTESY TOURISME LAURENTIDES / Colours begin to change first at higher elevations and then slowly work their way down into the valleys.

