QUEBEC It was a year of political change in Quebec - big political change.
If 2017 was marked by doubts about the staying power of François Legault's fledgling Coalition Avenir Québec party, 2018 proved the naysayers wrong as his party swept the Oct. 1 provincial election in stunning fashion.
The CAQ blue wave, more of a political tsunami, swept across the province as Quebecers decided it was the right vehicle - certainly the least risky option - for the change they craved after about 12 years of Liberal government rule.
The results of that decision left the two traditional parties, the Liberals and Parti Québécois, in tatters. For the first time in about 50 years, neither of them formed a government. Quebec had its first CAQ government.
While the PQ was wiped off the map in Montreal and reduced to 10 seats across the province, the Liberals lost everywhere east of St-Lambert with the exception of the Quebec City riding of Jean-Talon as francophones voted massively for the CAQ.
The final score was CAQ 74 seats, Liberals 29, PQ 10, Québec solidaire 10, and one independent.
The icing on the cake for the CAQ came Dec. 10 when they won a byelection in the riding of Roberval, bringing the party's total to 75 MNAs.
With Legault's star rising, others fell. PQ Leader Jean-François Liseé quit from the stage on election night. Liberal Leader Philippe Couillard followed him out the door a few days later. Both parties are now in reflection over their future, looking for ways to reconnect with voters.
The only folks to not get aboard the CAQ bandwagon were those in the English-speaking community.
Without the sovereignty issue to motivate them, many just sat out the vote or voted Liberal as usual.
That same desire for change allowed the small left-wing Québec solidaire party to make an electoral breakthrough off the island of Montreal. Despite a good start, the QS year ended with the party embroiled in a controversy over the attire of some of its new MNAs in the legislature.
IDENTITY POLITICS CONTINUES TO THRIVE The CAQ campaigned saying it would reduce Quebec's immigration influx from 50,000 a year to 40,000 and it made good on the promise - at least on paper. But with the federal government controlling family unification and refugee programs, much remains to happen before the CAQ actually hits that target. Arduous negotiations are underway.
At the same time, Legault has stated categorically that his government will proceed with a ban on religious symbols for persons in authority, such as judges, police officers and prison guards. During the campaign, Legault said action on the issue was urgent. But once in power the party discovered drafting such legislation is complicated. Now the government says it will table it in the new year, a plan confirmed by Legault in a yearend interview with the Montreal Gazette.
Meanwhile, the former Liberal government's plan for face coverings, Bill 62, is on hold as a result of a court challenge.
REEFER MADNESS GRIPS QUEBEC Cannabis became legal in Canada Oct. 17. Despite plenty of media hype, it was more or less a nonevent, with no major security issues or incidents to speak of. In fact, the only problem to emerge was the shortage of the product at Quebec's cannabis stores. After initial long lines and a flood of online orders, the Société québécoise du cannabis decided it could only operate from Thursday to Sunday.
But while the rest of the country has moved on to other themes now that cannabis is legal, the new CAQ government moved on its election promise to revisit the issue. The Liberals'legislation, Bill 157, set 18 as the legal age but just before the legislature recessed for Christmas, CAQ junior health and social services minister Lionel Carmant presented a bill to increase the age to 21.
PUBLIC FINANCES The Liberals paid a price for wanting to fix the province's books with their austerity agenda, but it means the new CAQ government arrived in office with money to burn. In December, new CAQ Finance Minister Eric Girard presented a fiscal update that revealed Quebec's surplus in 2018-19 will be $1.65 billion. It's that kind of money that will help the CAQ deliver on a key $700-$900 million election promise to create a flat school board tax in 2019.
Legault's new problem for 2019 will be managing expectations.
LEGAULT JOINS THE 'CANADIAN CLUB'As the year wound down, Legault, as Quebec's new premier, made his first foray into the workings of the federal system, attending a meeting of the first ministers in Montreal.
While some of the other premiers were squabbling with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau over Ottawa's carbon tax, Legault quietly went about his business. His one slip, referring to Alberta's oil exports as "dirty energy," compared to Quebec's clean hydro energy.
Reporters from English Canada struggled to get a handle on what Legault is about with one journalist referring to him as the "wild card" of the meeting, and "a conservative with an environmental agenda."
SOME KEY PLAYERS DIED The year was also marked by the deaths of many, many provincial politicians who, in their time, were household names.
Among those who died in the last year were Paul Gérin-Lajoie, John Ciaccia, Lise Payette, Élaine Zakaïb, Louis O'Neill, Richard Le Hir and Bernard Landry, the former premier. pauthier@postmedia.com Twitter.com/philipauthier
CREDIT: PHILIP AUTHIER.;The Gazette

