When the city of Montreal announced it would cancel a snowremoval contract in the Sud-Ouest borough, Paul Gott and his neighbours on Coursol St. were not surprised.
While many Montrealers have been grumbling about the slow pace of snow removal after last week's storm, Gott said one side of his street hasn't been cleared since the Christmas holidays.
"It has been kind of crazy; there is nowhere to park," Gott said on Monday. "I pay for a parking permit but have to park around the corner because of the snow."
Gott has lived on the street for 30 years and said the snow removal has never been so slow.
On many parts of Coursol St., the icy sidewalks are still treacherous. Neighbouring streets such as Vinet and Dominion still have snowbanks that are three feet high.
On Sunday, the company contracted to clear the snow put up signs saying they would remove the snow on Coursol St. during the day on Monday. Gott said he wasn't holding his breath.
"They put signs up last week and towed some cars, but they never came and cleared the snow," said Gott, who teaches at Concordia University.
In a followup discussion with the Montreal Gazette Monday evening, Gott said the snow had finally been cleared around 6 p.m.
Gott said it often takes six or seven days for his one-way street to be cleared, but he has never had to wait this long. He said Mother Nature has done a better job of removing some of the snow than the snow-removal company, Pavages D'Amour.
Last week, the city of Montreal announced it would cancel a $16-million, five-year contract with the firm at the end of the season.
Complaints to the borough about insufficient snow clearing were eight times higher than the norm, borough mayor Benoit Dorais said last week.
The city's executive committee chairman, Pierre Desrochers, said the situation in the Sud-Ouest borough "is totally unacceptable."
"There has been a breach of trust between the contractor and borough," he said.
The company has been able to fulfil snow-clearing contracts in Lachine and Ahuntsic-Cartierville and on the West Island, but failed in the congested Sud-Ouest neighbourhoods of St-Henri, Little Burgundy, Pointe-St-Charles and Griffintown because they underestimated the amount of work and resources required for a dense urban setting, Desrochers said last week.
According to the city, 76 per cent of the snow that fell last week has been cleared from the borough's streets.
When contacted by the Montreal Gazette on Monday, company president Stephane D'Amour refused to comment on the city's decision to cancel the contract. D'Amour also refused to explain why it has taken his workers so long to remove snow from Coursol St.
Trevor Williams, a basketball coach at Dawson College, said he often has to carry his daughter two blocks to his car because he can't park in front of his house on Coursol.
"It has been horrible trying to get to daycare," Williams said. "We have been complaining and the neighbours are talking about it on our Facebook page. It's ridiculous." kwilton@postmedia.com
Credit: KATHERINE WILTON; The Gazette
JOHN MAHONEY / Paul Gott has lived on Coursol St. in Little Burgundy for 30 years and says the snow removal has never been as slow as it is this season.

