The head of a group of chambers of commerce is sounding the alarm, saying many Quebec businesses aren't adequately prepared to deal with the coronavirus.
"It worries us that a large number of Quebec companies don't have adequate human resources policies to support their employees in this particular context," Charles Milliard, president and director general of the Fédération des chambres de commerce du Québec, said in a statement Tuesday.
Millard said infected employees or workers going into quarantine for possible exposure to the virus while the province is already experiencing a labour shortage could have a double-whammy effect on businesses in the province.
He said he is also worried about the supply chain, as goods from China have become more difficult to acquire since the coronavirus outbreak.
The province's largest employer's group shares that concern, saying the worldwide spread of the virus could make it difficult on operations and on the ability of Quebec businesses to fill orders.
However, so far there seems to be no need to panic about employee shortages because of the virus.
"We have no particular cases (of infected employees) in the 70,000 businesses that we represent," said Karolyne Gagnon, vice-president of labour and legal affairs for the Conseil du patronat du Québec.
"But we're telling employers to sensitize employees about proper hygiene and about the need to stay home if they have symptoms."
She said she believes most businesses already have plans to allow employees to work from home, whether to mitigate the effects of other health scares (like the H1N1 flu) or to alleviate traffic congestion caused by major construction projects like the Turcot Interchange or the Réseau express métropolitain, which will force the closure of the Mount Royal tunnel at the end of the month.
At Hydro-Québec, one of the province's largest employers, there are currently no cases of employees who have been quarantined and are working from home, said spokesperson Cendrix Bouchard.
"We've been monitoring the situation daily," Bouchard said. "There are no business trips in China right now. If there were any, they would be cancelled, and we are evaluating each trip on a case-by-case basis.
"If employees want to travel for personal reasons and they want to visit an affected area, upon their return we ask them to follow Health Canada's guidelines" to self-monitor for 14 days and self-quarantine if they show symptoms of the virus.
Bouchard said because Hydro-Québec provides an essential service, all department managers must have backup plans in place to cover a worst-case scenario.
"But that's something we'll do with other situations, like for freezing rain episodes or the spring thaw," he said.
For the moment, Bouchard said, other factors could affect Hydro-Québec's employees more severely than the coronavirus, like the coming closure of the Deux-Montagnes tunnel, which is expected to affect the commutes of 2,200 office employees out of roughly 9,000 who work on the island of Montreal, nearly 25 per cent of its workforce.
Among other large employers, the National Bank has several employees working from home as a preventive measure, said spokesperson Claude Breton.
At Air Canada, spokesperson Pascale Déry said the Montreal-based company is following the guidance of "relevant health authorities to ensure the safety of both employees and passengers." jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder Facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist

