In a summer that has been relatively hot overall, this weekend won't be the hottest, but it will have its moments.
As it was Friday, Saturday will be hot with low humidity.
"Starting on Sunday, the humidity is going to be really intense," said Simon Legault, meteorologist with Environment Canada. "We can say we are heading into another heat wave, but it won't be of the same intensity as last week," said Legault, adding that last weekend was the summer's first heat wave.
A heat wave is when the temperature is over 30 C for at least three days and the temperature doesn't drop below 20 C overnight.
Environment Canada has issued two heat warnings already this summer. Here is what to expect from the weather this weekend, according to Environment Canada:
Saturday
It should be a mainly sunny day with wind coming from the southwest at 20 km/h in the morning.
There will be a high of 32 C and a humidex of 37 C. The night will be clear and the temperature will drop overnight to a low of 22 C.
Sunday There will be a mix of sun and cloud with a high of 29 C. This is the day when the humidity will really kick in, according to Legault. There is a 60 per cent chance of showers during the day and the night, which will also be cloudy. The temperature will drop to 21 C overnight.
Southern Quebec could see thunderstorms, according to Legault, but it is uncertain for Montreal.
Monday
We can expect to start the week on a sunny note with a high of 32 C. The temperature will drop overnight to a low of 24 C with a clear sky. According to Legault, we can also expect to have a high humidex reading. Increased fire risk The Société de protection des forêts contre le feu also calls for cautionary measures in the next couple of days as there will be a risk of fire in spots across the province.
The regions most at risk until Sunday are Nord-du-Québec, Abitibi-Témiscamingue, Côte-Nord, Bas-St-Laurent, Gaspésie and Chaudière-Appalaches.
The society recommended using a fireplace with a fire screen with openings no more than one cm in size to make a safe campfire.
CREDIT: MIA ANHOURY;The Gazette

