Nobody woke them up.
In the varied lexicon of explanations that have been trotted out over the years to explain a foulup, Quebec's politicians came up with an entirely new one for why they failed to act this week and 300 people were left shivering on Highway 13 Tuesday night in a blizzard.
But history shows if the parliamentary system is unforgiving of ministers who make mistakes - traditionally the buck always stops at the top - it's even more cruel to those who do nothing.
And as the week at the National Assembly wrapped Friday and a winter storm evolved into a political storm, the hallway chatter was about how many days are left before Laurent Lessard gets shuffled out of the transport portfolio.
The dismay in Premier Philippe Couillard's face Thursday, as he was forced to cough up an official apology to Quebecers told the story. Nobody can remember such an act of contrition from a premier in many, many years.
At his side, like two school boys caught smoking in the washroom, were Lessard and Public Security Minister Martin Coiteux, the other minister in the hot seat.
It was hard to size up what was on Couillard's mind. Moments earlier he had stepped into the mix, calling in the government's main firefighter, Florent Gagne, a former head of the Surete du Quebec, to unravel the events. It's being called an external investigation. Was that a Couillard vote of nonconfidence in his men? He described the opposition calls for Lessard and Coiteux's heads as partisan politics but agreed the situation was not normal.
"They (Lessard and Coiteux) were not informed, period," Couillard said. "They woke up in the morning and nobody had called them. It's part of the situation (to be investigated)." Pausing for effect, Couillard referred to what happened as a major "foul-up."
"There is no other word for it," Couillard said.
Today there are still more questions than answers about what happened. How was it that two tractor-trailer drivers were able to refuse towing in the middle of a blizzard and clog up such an important roadway. Why didn't or couldn't the Surete du Quebec force them out? How did 300 people wind up trapped in their cars, in the middle of a big city, with full wireless access? With so much warning about the storm, which dumped 40 centimetres of snow on the island, why was Transport Quebec caught flatfooted? The union representing employees says they were calling for reinforcements but got none.
In the end, it took 10 hours for the highway to be closed to traffic in the crisis, allowing more and more vehicles to pour in. So far, two heads have rolled: Anne-Marie Leclerc, a deputy minister in charge of civil emergencies, and the SQ officer in charge of highway operations.
La Presse reported Friday that Leclerc, a 17-year veteran in the ministry, is in reality the first scapegoat. As was the case for her minister, Montreal's big high-tech Transport Quebec centre, which monitors the roads, never warned her either about the gravity of the situation.
Politically, however, things are very clear. Lessard and Coiteux take the hit.
A Leger-TVA-Journal de Montreal found 83 per cent of Quebecers believe Lessard failed to do his duty, 60 per cent think he should have foreseen the impact and 48 per cent believe he should resign.
Seventy four per cent are dissastified with Coiteux's performance.
Lessard and Coiteux have learned the hard way the perils of not at least appearing to be in charge in a crisis. The man who comes out looking the best is Montreal Mayor Denis Coderre who would have ridden to the rescue on a fire truck if he could have in this election year.
Lessard has discovered something his predecessors have over the last 10 years and that is that the minister does not actually run the ministry. With its "leave the driving to us," philosophy, it's the ministry that runs the minister, telling him or her where to show up to cut the ribbons opening highways.
Lessard's inability to control events reveals the opaque nature of Transport Quebec, often criticized for its "culture of secrecy"; described as a beastly place to work where intimidation tactics and turf wars have been well documented.
One former deputy minister, Dominique Savoie, is on the record as saying she did not take orders from anyone. In one surreal moment this week, the Parti Quebecois and Coalition Avenir Quebec opposition parties took turns heaping praise on the one man who actually tried to clean up the ministry, Liberal MNA and former police officer Robert Poeti.
The Journal de Montreal revealed the bureaucracy is so thick, it takes 94 steps to decide whether something is an emergency.
Yet it's Lessard - who was at home watching the news on television as the crisis unfolded before deciding things were OK and going to bed - who comes across as having fumbled. Coiteux, the opposition reported, was seen dining at the Concorde Hotel restaurant on the Grande Allee as the blizzard roared outside. In both cases, they believed their ministries had things under control.
In the provincial capital, nobody is surprised about Lessard. The former mayor of Thetford Mines, he is not known as a decisive, takecharge kind of guy. The happy-golucky captain on a ship without any officers is how one media outlet described him.
While popular in rural ridings for his folksy style, he has a habit of shooting himself in the foot, too. On Wednesday morning when reporters at the press gallery approached him to ask if he was satisfied with Transport Quebec's response to the storm he snapped back that they were asking their questions too loudly.
A few moments later - after the strategy wonks in the premier's office got wind of the shambles unfolding in the hallway - Couillard himself emerged to express the first snippet of empathy and understanding for victims.
It was great theatre with Couillard waving his personal mobile phone in the air asking how it was that people trapped in their cars did not get any kind of reassurances that help was on the way. It was Couillard to the rescue. Quebec premiers, in fact, have a solid track record when it comes to rising to the occasion in times of crisis. Couillard was praised for his response to the Quebec City mosque shootings in January. Former premier Pauline Marois deftly handled the Lac-Megantic tragedy.
They have learned to never underestimate public opinion - especially when voters turn to the government for help.
History proves they are right to appear caring and in control.
The popular Netflix series The Crown recently re-created the 1952 incident in which a thick pea soup of fog enveloped London and then-prime minister Winston Churchill's initial response was blase.
He paid a price. In the aftermath of the fog it was revealed about 4,000 people had died. Many others suffered long-term breathing problems.
By Friday, with the reality of our storm now clear, the number of storm-related deaths in Quebec stood at six.
And the government's star was tarnished. pauthier@postmedia.com
Credit: PHILIP AUTHIER QUEBEC; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Transportation Minister Laurent Lessard and Public Security Minister Martin Coiteux have learned the hard way the perils of not at least appearing to be in charge in a crisis, Philip Authier writes.

