Everybody wants to be a DJ, as classic rap act De La Soul once said. With his new interactive show, Kid Koala aims to give the people what they want.
The Montreal scratch DJ allows fans to get in the mix by providing attendees with their own turntable consoles and stacks of colourcoded vinyl records. At specific moments throughout the performance, different coloured lights come on, indicating which vinyl to use as concertgoers participate in his 50-turntable orchestra.
Instructions may be required, judging from a test run Kid Koala did at Toronto's Luminato Festival in 2015. Some young 'uns, it turns out, had never used a turntable.
Audience interaction has been a running theme in the DJ's shows for years now. Allowing fans to actually do what he does just seemed like the logical next step.
"For me, it's about that feeling of touching the sound (on the record), controlling it, bending it, playing it backward," said Kid Koala, whose real name is Eric San. "It's a really fun feeling if you've never had a tactile interface with audio.
"For this show, the way I see it, it's like when everyone holds up lighters at a rock concert. When you look at it, it becomes something beyond what you think a bunch of glimmering lighters would look like. It becomes this beautiful, connected, expansive thing, even though everyone is just responsible for their little point of light. This is the audio version: you're responsible for a tiny part of the sound in the room, but together it makes something greater than its parts."
Fittingly, people won't be playing along to what one might typically think of as DJ music - no thumping beats or crowd-rousing MCs. Instead, they're bringing to life songs from Kid Koala's new album, Music To Draw To: Satellite, released recently on Arts & Crafts.
As the title suggests, it's pretty low-key stuff - the kind of breathtakingly pretty, ambient music that lets the mind wander. And is custom-made to draw to. Or write to (which I can confirm, as that's precisely what I'm doing right now). Or doodle to. Or write a screenplay to.
Interestingly, the album found its anchor with ethereal Icelandic vocalist Emilíana Torrini.
A longtime fan of her music, Kid Koala finally reached out to her when he needed a singer for a track he had made for Jason Reitman's 2014 film Men, Women and Children. When that worked out, he got up the nerve to ask her to sing on his new album.
Picking Torrini up at Montreal's Trudeau airport in October 2015, Kid Koala didn't know what they were going to get up to for the next 10 days while he hosted the singer in his loft/recording studio. "Prior to that, we had spoken for 10, 15 minutes," the 42-year-old said.
For the first four days, they didn't enter the studio at all.
"(My wife) Corinne calls it our dating period," Kid Koala said. "(Torrini) was like, 'I want to go buy jeans - they're very expensive in Iceland.' Or 'I want to go see this movie.' We were literally not doing any music at all. We were just getting to know each other. We talked about everyday life, what makes us happy or sad, breakups. Then she told me about this article about this Mars mission."
The story involved a woman who had been accepted to be one of the volunteer astronauts on Dutch company Mars One's flight to the planet in 2022, and would be leaving her partner behind.
"That struck a chord with both of us," Kid Koala said.
A metaphor-laden concept was in place: two lovers, worlds apart. The next morning, Kid Koala awoke at 4 a.m. and penned the song Adrift. When Torrini emerged, he handed her the lyrics and nervously awaited her reaction. Ten minutes later, they were in his studio recording it.
In the end, Kid Koala wrote lyrics to five songs on the album (Torrini wrote two), marking his debut as a lyricist.
"I didn't set out to make a personal record, but there was stuff I had to figure out, and get through," he said. "It was the perfect storm of circumstances."
Montreal Gazette
CREDIT: T'Cha Dunlevy;Brantford Expositor

