As Environment Canada issued a heat warning Wednesday, Mayor Valérie Plante said Montreal is monitoring temperatures and is ready to deploy emergency measures if necessary.
Public health authorities are doing everything possible to protect the vulnerable and avoid a repeat of the consequences of last summer's heat wave, when 66 people died, she said.
"I want to reassure the population that we are currently on alert for a possible wave of extreme heat and we are ready to intervene if necessary," Plante said at a press conference at city hall.
"All stakeholders in the Montreal agglomeration, including both the independent municipalities and boroughs, are working in close collaboration to ensure the well-being and safety of all Montrealers," she added.
Environment Canada forecast highs of 32 C Wednesday, 33 C Thursday and 34 C Friday, dipping to minimums of 21 C, 24 C and 21 C, respectively, overnight.
That is just under the minimum for deploying emergency measures, according to Montreal's civic protection organization, which says it's a heat wave when one of the two following conditions is met:
The maximum average temperature reaches or exceeds 33 C for three consecutive days and the minimum temperature reaches or exceeds 20 C.
The minimum average temperature reaches or exceeds 25 C for two consecutive nights. Dr. David Kaiser, who is responsible for environmental health and healthy lifestyles at the regional public health directorate, said the most important thing is to protect those most vulnerable to heat: seniors, people with chronic illnesses or mental health problems, and children age four and under.
Last year, firefighters and police visited 40,000 homes to check up on vulnerable people.
This year, public health authorities are focusing on better targeting door-to-door visits to ensure they reach those who are in most need of help, Kaiser said.
"We want to better target places and people," he said.
Visits will concentrate on older buildings, such as rooming houses without air conditioning, and on inner-city neighbourhoods lacking green spaces, which combat heat islands, he said.
The public health department has created a registry of addresses that have already been identified by firefighters and police, as well as volunteers who provide services like Meals-on-Wheels, he said.
That list, which is not public, is being constantly refined as emergency workers monitor vulnerable people, he said.
Public health authorities are also considering following the example of Paris, which keeps a self-declared list of people especially vulnerable to high temperatures, such as the elderly or people with breathing problems, who can register by phone.
Authorities check in with people on the list by phone, provide advice on how to cool off and send medical help if necessary.
"It's a model we find interesting," Kaiser said.
Opposition leader Lionel Perez called on the city to adopt the Parisian system without delay. He also urged health authorities to deploy the heat wave emergency plan without waiting for temperatures to meet the official criteria.
The action plan has been deployed three times in the past: in 2010, 2011 and 2018.
However, Kaiser said it does not improve outcomes to deploy the emergency plan before it's necessary, since mortality only increases after two or three days of intense heat.
"That doesn't mean nothing is being done," he said. Even before temperatures reach critical levels, it's important to take measures to protect yourself and vulnerable people you know, he noted.
Here are some tips for coping with hot weather:
Drink water regularly without waiting to be thirsty. Ensure that children are drinking plenty of water.
Spend two to three hours a day in a cool environment, ideally with air conditioning.
Reduce physical effort.
Never leave a child alone in a car or in a poorly ventilated room.
Keep in touch with relatives and other people you know who are elderly or sick.
The city is leaving it up to boroughs whether to extend hours at swimming and wading pools, and said it doesn't know which ones are doing so, said Laurence Houde-Roy, a spokesperson for the mayor's office. Côte-des-Neiges- Notre-Dame-de-Grâce issued an advisory saying the borough's two outdoor pools will stay open until 8 p.m. and wading pools until 7:30 p.m. (Martin Luther King Park) or 8 p.m. (Trenholme Park).
CREDIT: MARIAN SCOTT;Postmedia News

