Has it been a year already? It seems like only yesterday Montreal was mourning the loss of its prodigal son, Leonard Cohen.
If the past 12 months have been a chance for our city to celebrate and commemorate the life of the inimitable singer, songwriter, poet and quintessential gentleman, en famille, on Monday fans will get an opportunity to share that love with the world.
Some very big names can be found amid the international and interdisciplinary roster of talent descending on the Bell Centre for Tower of Song: A Memorial Tribute to Leonard Cohen.
As a primer for the occasion, here's a look through the list of those involved and their connection to Cohen, along with scattered hints as to what songs they might perform:
Hal Willner (producer). Willner produced a 2005 tribute to Cohen at the Sydney Festival titled Came So Far for Beauty. The show featured performances by Nick Cave, Jarvis Cocker, Beth Orton, Rufus and Martha Wainwright, Kate & Anna McGarrigle and Cohen's former backup singers Perla Batalla and Julie Christensen.
Sting. The former Police frontman teamed up with Irish music veterans The Chieftains for a swaying, wistful cover of Cohen's 1967 song Sisters of Mercy on the 1995 compilation Tower of Song: The Songs of Leonard Cohen. Cohen's wistful waltz is rumoured to have been composed in Edmonton during a blizzard, inspired by a pair of hitchhikers he let sleep in his hotel room. "I always figured it was about a convent somewhere," Sting has said of the song. "It's not really about nuns at all. I think it's about a bordello."
Elvis Costello. In a 2009 interview with the Toronto Star, Costello was philosophical about the fact that Cohen had never been a guest on his TV talk show Spectacle. "I remember going to see Leonard Cohen (in concert) and thinking, 'He'll never be on Spectacle because he doesn't need to do it.'" "He need never do another interview for anybody, because (his) show is perfect, the most perfect show I think I've ever seen."
Ron Sexmith. The Canadian singer-songwriter has cited Cohen as a major inspiration. "Everything Leonard does feels so lofty and important to me - what he's saying, the weight of it," Sexsmith told the Music Makers and Soul Shakers podcast in June. Sexsmith has covered Cohen songs including Sisters of Mercy, Heart With No Companion and The Faith. In 2006, he performed So Long Marianne on an outdoor stage in Toronto with Cohen and Steven Page of the Barenaked Ladies.
Lana del Rey. In 2013, the L.A. pop-noir chanteuse covered Cohen's Chelsea Hotel No. 2. Then a few days after Cohen's death, on Nov. 11, 2016, she posted a tribute on Instagram (with an image from her Chelsea Hotel cover), saying, "I'd be lying if I said it didn't kind of break my heart that I never got to tell you how much you changed me. Not that it would've mattered to ya, it's just that other than Bob and Joan you were the only person I ever really felt spoke my language. I love you as a real fan and I always look for a little bit of you in all of my future friends. God bless."
Feist. The Canadian indie-pop queen offered a heartfelt cover of Cohen's Hey, That's No Way to Say Goodbye at this year's Juno Awards. Alone on acoustic guitar, accompanied by a pair of backup singers, she captured the song's lugubrious wistfulness in all its mystery. She also delivered a spirited cover of Closing Time in Sarah Polley's film Take This Waltz (see Seth Rogen, below).
Seth Rogen. The Canadian actor starred alongside Michelle Williams in Sarah Polley's 2011 relationship drama Take This Waltz, inspired by the Cohen song of the same name.
k.d. lang. There are seemingly endless covers of Leonard Cohen's Hallelujah, but k.d. lang's performance of the song at the 2005 Junos is tough to beat for its simplicity and soul-baring passion. She had included the song on her 2004 covers album Hymns of the 49th Parallel, and she got to sing it for the man himself in 2006, when Cohen was inducted into the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame. "There's something about the lyrics that transport you into a more meditative state," she told CTV News last year. "To me (it's about) the struggle between having human desire and searching for spiritual wisdom."
Courtney Love. You wouldn't think grunge rock royalty Courtney Love would have much in common with Cohen, but she performed his song Take This Longing at a Hole concert in 2010 and has covered The Future. "I grew up with Leonard Cohen records and going, 'I wish that was me he was writing about,'" she told Rolling Stone's David Fricke, following Kurt Cobain's death in 1994. "I wanted to be Suzanne, I wanted to live down by the river. ... I just wanted to be the girl in the Leonard Cohen song."
Damien Rice posted the song Back to Her Man as "An Homage to Leonard Cohen" on his website, following the singer's death last November. "A few years ago I had the honour of opening up for you in Ireland," he wrote. "After the concert, I noticed something curious. My mother, my sisters, my girlfriend and ex-girlfriend were all dripping with love for you. I found it humorous to imagine that after your show many women would be going back home and that their men were not, and would never quite be, Leonard Cohen."
Philip Glass. The American minimalist composer collaborated with Cohen for Glass's 2007 album Book of Longing, inspired by Cohen's 2006 book of poetry of the same name. Glass's song cycle had its world premiere as a performance at Toronto's Luminato Festival. "For me, this work is both a departure from past work and the fulfilment of an artistic dream," Glass said.
Wesley Schultz and Jeremiah Fraites of the Lumineers. Dig around on YouTube and you'll find a 2013 video of Lumineers lead singer Schultz and Langhorne Slim covering Cohen's Tonight Will Be Fine. In a 2014 Facebook post in honour of Cohen's 80th birthday, Schultz wrote, "I'm in awe of his writing. ... Leonard Cohen is a master of melodies and words."
Ballets Jazz de Montreal. The Montreal dance troupe holds exclusive rights for dance or circus shows based on Cohen's music for the next five years - a controversial deal that has left some other Montreal dance companies in the cold. Inspired by Cohen's repertoire, the Ballets Jazz's show Dance Me is at Theatre Maisonneuve, Dec. 5 to 9.
Patrick Watson. The heavenlyvoiced singer-songwriter joined fellow-Montrealers Li'l Andy and Little Scream in a rendition of Cohen's Democracy in a tribute at the Rialto Theatre in 2013.
Coeur de Pirate. Montrealer Beatrice Martin began performing her own enchanting take on Hallelujah following Cohen's death last year. Dig back a little further in time and you'll find her performing Silent Night with Adam Cohen on George Stroumboulopoulos Tonight in 2012.
Adam Cohen. Aside from being the driving force behind this event, Leonard Cohen's son is an artist in his own right, of course. He also produced his father's final album and has never shied away from performing his dad's songs, including Take This Waltz, So Long Marianne and Bird on a Wire. tdunlevy@postmedia.com Twitter.com/TChaDunlevy
AT A GLANCE
Tower of Song: A Memorial Tribute to Leonard Cohen takes place Monday at 7:30 p.m. at the Bell Centre. Tickets cost $40.25 to $276.50, available at evenko.ca. All proceeds go to the Canada Council for the Arts, the Conseil des arts et des lettres du Quebec and the Conseil des arts de Montreal. The concert will be broadcast on CBC Radio Two and cbcmusic.ca, Tuesday at 7 p.m.; and will air on CBC-TV, Jan. 3 at 8 p.m. Kaveh Nabatian's new documentary on Leonard Cohen, A Crack In Everything, airs Dec. 3 at 9 p.m. on the CBC Documentary Channel; and Dec. 27 at 7 p.m. on CBC TV Montreal. An app called Detour, offering users a guided tour of Leonard Cohen's Montreal, narrated by Martha Wainwright, will be available as of Nov. 9 at cbc.ca/cohen.
Credit: T'CHA DUNLEVY; The Gazette



