It's been a tumultuous month for the alt-right in Montreal.
In early May the Montreal Gazette exposed one of the most prominent neo-Nazi figures in North America.
"Zeiger" was known as the No. 2 writer on the Daily Stormer - said to be the world's largest neo-Nazi website - and an influential figure in neo-Nazi recruiting circles.
He was considered a thought leader in North America's neo-Nazi movement, having helped to develop recruitment strategies that focused on internet culture, as well as claiming responsibility for the resurgence of Siege - a 1980s manifesto that called for the neo-Nazi movement to adopt individual acts of terrorism as political strategy. Siege, which Zeiger digitized, was the main inspiration for the American neo-Nazi terrorist organization Atomwaffen Division.
This information was given to the Montreal Gazette by a group of anti-fascists, who had scoured through 12,000 messages on a closed forum and connected Zeiger to a Rosemont-La-Petite-Patrie man named Gabriel Sohier Chaput. (A home address that Zeiger provided during a discussion on the closed forum matched the address where Sohier Chaput lived.)
The news spread across the city like wildfire.
Mayor Valérie Plante denounced the presence of neo-Nazis, saying, "any hateful and neo-Nazi propaganda obviously has no place in Montreal; it goes against the values of tolerance and respect promoted by the city. I strongly denounce any display promoting this ideology."
Quebec Public Safety Minister Martin Coiteux also condemned targeted hatred against communities in a tweet, and said Quebec was an "open and inclusive society."
The next day, posters went up around Sohier Chaput's neighbourhood that included his name, face and address as well as a brief description of Zeiger's online and real-world neo-Nazi activity. Similar posters would go up in the following weeks identifying others in the movement, including Shawn Beauvais MacDonald, Vincent Bélanger-Mercure and Philippe Gendron.
Montreal police haven't confirmed whether they are investigating Zeiger's neo-Nazi activism and propaganda, because it is police protocol to not comment on ongoing investigations. They did, however, tell La Presse that the posters identifying Sohier Chaput could be considered incitement to hatred.
"It's beyond ironic," said Venkman, one of the anti-fascists who participated in the effort to unmask Zeiger. "You're talking about Nazis who are talking about gassing Jews. Just putting their posters up with their name and their picture and address is inciting hatred? We don't know if they're serious about this, but it seems completely ludicrous."
Evan Balgord, executive-director of the Canadian Anti-Hate Network, said the posters have a historical precedent. "That actually comes from a Canadian tradition," he said, describing how the Anti-Racist Action Network of the 1990s would poster neighbourhoods in Toronto identifying members of the Heritage Front, a large national neo-Nazi organization.
"They saw that as an act of community self-defence."
Balgord specified that the Canadian Anti-Hate Network is not an activist organization, in that it will never be involved in planning rallies or "on-the-ground organizing."
Instead it will focus on gathering intelligence on hate groups and providing that information to the public.
Sohier Chaput, whose landlord confirmed that he still lived at the address in question shortly before the exposé was published, has disappeared.
Journalists knocked on his door, called his family members and went through every avenue possible to attempt to reach him.
Following the Montreal Gazette's story on Zeiger, rumours began to spread about his whereabouts: he had gone into hiding in rural Quebec, some sources said. He was at a family member's house somewhere else in Montreal, said another. He had hopped on a plane to Vancouver, or he had gone to the United States. One thing was for certain - he was no longer at his known address.
After a few days of silence on the alt-right sites that Zeiger was known to frequent, the Daily Stormer finally published an update.
The text - written by founder Andrew Anglin and titled "In a Wild Storm of Shuttenings, Man Overboard" - eulogized Zeiger and referred to him in the past tense.
After describing how American white nationalist Richard Spencer's website had been shut down by its web-hosting service, Anglin wrote that "instead of these monumental developments weighing on my mind, it's the fact that our guy has been run out of his home and job. There's people hunting for him in the streets.
"Zeiger was a brave and noble warrior, both online and off. This is a huge blow to a man who did so much for our struggle for many years," Anglin wrote. "Now finally the system has come to grind him into dust."
Elsewhere on the alt-right internet, things were changing. The largest neo-Nazi podcast in Canada - where Zeiger appeared as a guest semi-regularly - released its 90th episode, subtitled "Will We Make it to Episode 100?" The hosts lamented the loss of Zeiger.
Shaken by the efforts to unmask Zeiger, the hosts advised their neo-Nazi fan base to scrub their information from the internet, afraid that more unmaskings were on the way.
Days after that podcast was released, the hosts followed their own advice - deleting all of their podcasts from the sites on which they were hosted, and deleting their accounts on social media and various hate forums. Then, on May 16, Vice Canada and the Canadian Anti-Hate Network claimed to have revealed the identity of one of the podcast hosts.
Panic about being identified is visible on various far-right forums. The Right Stuff, a neo-Nazi podcast network whose forum Balgord describes as the principal platform of communication for the alt-right in Canada, made its forum private. Previously, anyone - even without an account - could view the forums. This was changed so that the forums could only be viewed by users with accounts. The freeaccount option was also removed, effectively moving the entire forum behind a paywall.
The effects of these changes reach beyond the internet. Balgord said that individuals such as Zeiger, along with having a high profile online, "vouch for other members in the movement, which would allow for those members to become trusted and be welcomed into both online and off-line networks."
As a result, he said, the journalists and anti-fascists who exposed Zeiger and others like him "disrupted the alt-right neo-Nazis'ability to spread hate propaganda and to organize in real life."
While the websites went underground, Montreal's alt-right network retaliated by posting stickers of the Fédération de Québécois de souche - a white supremacist group in Quebec that describes itself as a "nationalist political organization focusing on ending political correctness." The stickers went up over the posters identifying Zeiger in the Rosemont-La-Petite-Patrie borough.
Graffiti referencing two other alt-right figures also went up overnight on May 7, marking a series of Plateau-Mont-Royal apartment buildings and restaurants. Antifascists responded by organizing a family-friendly demonstration that marched through Sohier Chaput's neighbourhood. The protest stopped at his apartment, before continuing up the street to the residence of another well-known neo-Nazi named Philippe Gendron.
His apartment was heavily guarded by members of the farright group Soldiers of Odin - who were armed with "iron bars, sticks, masks or bulletproof vests," said Rosemont-La-Petite-Patrie resident Isabelle Baez, who wrote an article for the Huffington Post on her experience at the march.
Venkman said he expected that neo-Nazis would attempt some form of retaliation, and that the anti-fascists are preparing for it. He was proved right earlier this week when a group of masked members of the far-right group Atalante invaded the Montreal offices of Vice Quebec, just days after the Vice Canada-Canadian Anti-Hate Network report claiming to reveal the identity of a prominent neo-Nazi podcast host.
Venkman is continuing to gather information about the alt-right in the city. The posters that were put up also included an email address where people could send tips about suspected neo-Nazis, and Venkman said that the tip line is overflowing with information.
"Just in the last 10 days we were able to identify several more of these guys," he said.
"We're going to keep doing this.
We're going to keep putting names to faces and exposing them."
CREDIT: SHANNON CARRANCO AND JON MILTON;The Gazette

