Don't despair: the dumping of snow predicted for the Montreal region won't be around for very long.
Environment Canada meteorologist Andre Cantin said he's confident the Montreal area will get at least 10 centimetres of snow on Thursday, starting in the early morning and ending early afternoon. He's more confident than he was for the last major snowfall predicted back on March 2, which didn't turn out to be the blizzard that was expected.
By Thursday morning rush hour, about four centimetres are likely to fall, making for a potentially slippery commute. The snow will turn to freezing rain and then straight rain starting about 3 or 4 p.m., Cantin said.
The rain will continue all day Friday. Thursday's high is forecast at -2 C, and Friday's high is expected to reach 7C. The warming trend will continue through the weekend, with temperatures predicted to reach near 10 C on Sunday and 7 C on Monday.
"By the end of the long Easter weekend, most of the snow will melt," Cantin said.
The storm is good news for skiers, and may extend the season for some hills in the region. The lower Laurentians will see 15 centimetres fall, while areas further north will get more. Mont-Tremblant could get up to 30 centimetres, Cantin said.
The mild temperatures forecast could also be a boon for the city of Montreal's finances, because the city may not have to send out snow removal equipment for this storm.
City officials will see how much snow has fallen and then take a look at the predicted temperatures to decide whether to cart away the snow from this storm, said Philippe Sabourin, a spokesperson for the city. Under the new city-wide snow clearing policy, the central city decides whether all the boroughs will start a snow removal operation. Such an operation costs about $17 million, according to the city's website.
"As soon as 2.5 centimetres have fallen, the plows head out, but it's too early to say now whether a snow removal operation will take place," Sabourin said.
He explained the city may just push the snow to the sides of the streets and let Mother Nature melt it away. "It will depend on how much snow falls, and how much of that actually stays on the roads," Sabourin said.
jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/JasonMagder Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist
Credit: JASON MAGDER; The Gazette

