In a wide-ranging interview with the Montreal Gazette, Valérie Plante discusses her proudest achievement, her greatest regret and the biggest surprise about her new job. Andy Riga takes her pulse on five hot-button issues - from Pink Line to snow clearing
Mayor Valérie Plante arrives carrying soup in a paper cup. It's a noon-hour interview and she's nursing a bad cold that literally left her speechless at city council three days earlier.
"I love soup and I'm sick," she says, laughing, by way of explanation.
Though clearly still under the weather, Plante's voice is back and she's not about to skip the round of 100-days-in-office chats with reporters. The reviews of her baptism by fire haven't been good and she wants to set the record straight.
In a wide-ranging interview with the Montreal Gazette, Plante discusses her proudest achievement, her biggest regret and what she has found to be most surprising about being mayor. She also gives her take on some of the key moments in her first three and a half months in office.
The mayor does not hesitate when asked her greatest feat so far: ordering 300 new hybrid transit buses to deal with chronic overcrowding.
"Montrealers are looking for more mobility and it's something I talked a lot about during my campaign," she says. Fulfilled thanks to financial help from Quebec, the purchase served to prove her detractors wrong about her having no sway with the provincial government, she adds.
Her biggest regret? A fat tax hike that contradicted her election promise not to exceed inflation.
"It was the right thing to do and I stand by it and it is a tax dedicated to water - we're not going to have a party with that money," Plante says. But in hindsight, she says, she realizes she should have made clear during the campaign that her tax pledge only referred to part of the municipal tax bills - and she should have better explained the tax hike once it was announced.
The backlash from the botched budget is still being felt.
Which may explain Plante's biggest eye-opener: the high expectations Montrealers have for their mayor.
"I'm surprised by the level of expectations. People have lots of hopes," she says.
That can result in "people saying, 'Well, Mme. Plante, we wish you would have done this differently,'but sometimes it's just something I don't have control of."
At the same time, she realizes "being the mayor brings out a lot of aspirations for Montrealers and I take that seriously. It just gives me energy to do my best to solve as many problems as I can."
Here are five key issues from the first 100 days, and what Plante has to say about them.
TAXES
WHAT HAPPENED: During the election campaign, Plante promised not to raise municipal taxes by more than the inflation rate, which was expected to be about 2 per cent in 2018. So voters were shocked when the average hike in her first budget, made public on Jan. 10, was 3.3 per cent. Adding to taxpayers'consternation was Plante's attitude. She initially dismissed critics, contending she wasn't actually breaking the pledge because the beyond-inflation increase was due to a hike in the water tax, not the city's "general tax." But that rationale didn't wash with many voters, since both taxes are based on property value and both are charged on the same bill. Also, nowhere in its platform did Projet Montréal say it was going to raise the water tax.
PLANTE'S POSITION: She should have chosen her words more carefully during the campaign, Plante acknowledges. But she contends she was blindsided by a financial hole left behind by the previous Coderre administration. "You become mayor and you open the books and you see this big projected deficit: $358 million. That's seven per cent of our entire budget - it's huge." Her administration also made the decision to ramp up work repairing and replacing the city's notoriously leaky water infrastructure. Montrealers would have understood the reasons for the tax decision had her administration done a better job of communicating about the budget, she says.
MOUNT ROYAL
WHAT HAPPENED: After a cyclist was killed on Mount Royal during the election campaign, Projet Montréal vowed to make the mountain safer for pedestrians and cyclists, but did not spell out details. In February, Plateau-Mont-Royal Mayor Luc Ferrandez, Plante's point man on big parks, announced a pilot project that would block drivers from using Camillien-Houde Way /Remembrance Rd. as an eastwest artery, eliminating a popular route linking Côte-des-Neiges and Plateau-Mont-Royal. The aim was to improve pedestrian and cyclist safety but the announcement caused an uproar. The initial announcement was short on details. For example, it only later emerged that the city would allow drivers arriving from the west to use the bigger Smith House parking lot on the eastern side when the smaller Beaver Lake lot is full. Ferrandez had promoted the idea of cutting the road in two for years but his declaration surprised even some of his fellow Projet councillors since the party's election platform referred to "gradually reducing transit traffic" on the mountain, not an abrupt shutdown. Drivers are furious about losing a popular crosscity route. Mountain users are worried about being cut off from parts of the mountain. Les amis de la montagne, whose mandate is to protect and promote Mount Royal, says the plan, on which it has not been consulted, could create more problems than it solves.
PLANTE'S POSITION: During the election campaign, when asked about Ferrandez's idea of banning through traffic on Mount Royal, Plante only said she would consider the idea. "When we took power, I was able to look at all that was done and it just makes sense," Plante says of the pilot project. She noted the city studied the idea in two reports, in 2008 and 2013. "A lot of people who use this transit road are upset. Well, I will prove to them that there are ways to go around the mountain and still go to work and do what you have to do, while giving Montrealers and tourists better access to the mountain." She says previous mayors have mulled over the idea, which she says is better for the environment as well as for people on foot and bike. "It's not an easy one," Plante says of the through-traffic problem. "That's probably why other politicians have never decided to take the lead on this one." She says an impact study will be made public after the pilot project.
SNOW AND ICE
WHAT HAPPENED: In January, snowstorms followed by freezing rain left in their wake snowclogged streets, slippery sidewalks and furious Montrealers. The Plante administration blamed the rougher-than-usual winter. But its case wasn't helped when it hesitated over a snow-clearing operation, hoping milder weather would eliminate the snow and ice. Mother Nature didn't co-operate. One borough mayor - Luis Miranda of Anjou - ignored city directives and had ice-free sidewalks, while much of Montreal's remained treacherous. Miranda became something of a folk hero after his good deed was met with a warning that Anjou could be hit with a fine of at least $200,000 for contravening city rules.
PLANTE'S POSITION: "We did well with the previous snowstorms and then we had the one with ice and we realized that some practices had to be reviewed," she says. Montreal is an expert on carting off snow but falters when it comes to dealing with slippery sidewalks, she admits. "When it comes to sidewalks, it's a borough responsibility, but as a city, it is our job to say, 'Hey, there's ice everywhere and we need to do better,'" Plante says. Montreal will spend an extra $1.5 million on salt this winter and "ice crushers" will be ordered to deal with treacherous sidewalks starting next winter, she says. With city snow dumps overflowing, Montreal is also opening a new one and has ordered extrastrong blowers so it can stuff more snow into existing ones. "This is a crazy winter," she says. "For me, it was important to say, here's what we should have done better and here's how we can do better" in the future.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
WHAT HAPPENED: Plante's highest-profile election promise was the Pink Line - a new 29-station métro line linking Montreal North and Lachine. So far, little has come of the idea - not even money for a study of the concept, which critics say will cost far more than the $6-billion figure Projet put forward during the campaign. However, a transit pledge she deemed her "No. 1 priority" is materializing. Plante convinced Quebec to help finance the purchase of 300 new hybrid buses by 2020, increasing the Société de transport de Montréal's fleet by 15 per cent, to 2,100 buses. Critics suggest the purchase is premature because the STM has run out of garage space and will have nowhere to park them. The transit agency says it will find a solution in time.
PLANTE'S POSITION: Plante says her administration has set up an internal committee to hash out the details of the Pink Line. "We are already putting energy and thinking behind the Pink Line." But she notes that a regional body - the Autorité régionale de transport métropolitain - will eventually have to come up with the proposal that will go to the provincial and federal governments, which would have to finance the new line. She hopes the ARTM will have set up an office to study the Pink Line by the fall of 2021. Plante admits she was "too excited" early in the election campaign when she suggested digging on the new line would start at the end of a first Projet Montréal mandate. She corrected that later, suggesting work would only start during a second mandate, meaning no sooner than late 2021. "My hope is that in a second mandate we'll be able to present some real action" on the Pink Line, she says.
STE-CATHERINE ST.
WHAT HAPPENED: Plante's party was unimpressed with Coderre's plan for a major revamp of Ste-Catherine St. Projet wanted a more pedestrian-friendly, car-light version. So far, Plante has nixed two parts of Coderre's ideas: there will be no heated sidewalks, nor will inflatable street coverings be installed during construction. However, Plante's vision for Montreal's marquee shopping street is still unknown. The new plan is due in March.
PLANTE'S POSITION: She won't give any hints about her new plan but says "we want to make sure that people will be happy with what they see in the end. Often, people feel like we do something that's really costly but they don't necessarily see the difference." That was one of the criticisms of the $50-million St. Lawrence River to Mount Royal promenade that Coderre built for Montreal's 375th anniversary. In the case of Ste-Catherine, Plante says she wants to ensure the makeover results in a "fantastic" experience for shoppers and pedestrians, with special attention paid to cleanliness and snow removal. As for heated sidewalks, she says it would have cost at least $142 million to install them along 3.3-kilometres of Ste-Catherine. "That was a crazy expense," especially since the city was not sure about the technology's effectiveness, she says. ariga@postmedia.com twitter.com/andyriga
CREDIT: ANDY RIGA;The Gazette

