Colin Moore arrives late for our meeting this week in Griffintown, blaming his tardiness on the traffic on the 20. He just took the bus into town from his apartment overlooking Lac St-Louis in southern Pointe-Claire. As he later quipped: "I always travel by BMW - bus, métro and walking."
He was happy to be meeting a Montreal Gazette journalist.
"Finally, I get to do an interview with an English paper," he said, as he sat down.
It's a classic Quebec thing, what we used to call "two solitudes" back in the day, but with a funny 21st-century twist. This anglophone from Pointe-Claire has been doing loads of media interviews with the franco press because they - and the rest of francophone Quebec - are extremely interested in La Voix and Moore is one of the four finalists on the incredibly popular music-contest TV show, the Québécois adaptation of The Voice that runs every Sunday night on TVA. He's already a major vedette in French Quebec. English people, however, have barely heard of him. The show attracts just under two million viewers every week and has a 50-per-cent market share.
The grand finale of La Voix is this Sunday and the final four vying for top honours for this year's crown are Moore, Rafaëlle Roy, Vincent Chouinard, and Geneviève Jodoin. There is a star-studded lineup of guests for the finale episode, including Michael Bolton, popular Quebec hip-hop star Loud, Corey Hart and his wife, Julie Masse, and Robert Charlebois.
Moore, a genial 40-year-old rocker who pays the bills by doing construction and renovation work, is happy to do his little bit to bring the two cultures together.
"I think there's more (English) people than ever before watching it because I'm on there," said Moore. "Hopefully I've brought a little bit of the English fan base to the show. A lot of my friends are watching it and they say, 'I would've never watched this show before, but I'm watching it 'cause you're on it.'And they're actually enjoying it. So it's good."
Moore grew up in the Valois neighbourhood of Pointe-Claire and then at 18, he moved into the city, spending the following years living in N.D.G., the Plateau and Westmount. He moved back to Pointe-Claire two years ago mainly because his girlfriend, a teacher, works in Beaconsfield.
"I had my share of French girlfriends, that's how I learned to speak French so well," said Moore.
Moore has been making music for over 20 years. He started out in punk bands and then at 25, after losing his voice from a little too much punk-rock screaming, he moved into folk-rock.
"I lost my voice for about six months," said Moore.
He signed with the local indie label Indica Records in 2009 and released two albums with the company, Leaving Home and Heart of the Storm. He was let go by Indica after the two albums and since then he's continued to tour the province, playing regularly. He wants to put out a third album and when an old pal from Indica suggested he audition for La Voix last fall, he figured the TV show might be a good way to spark interest in a new album.
He went to the audition right after a day of work renovating a house in St-Henri.
"I was covered in paint, I had plaster all over my pants and I was in my work boots," said Moore. "And they still called me back. I was so surprised."
Moore clearly isn't your usual music-contest candidate. He's much more of a rocker than someone who is likely to belt out a Katy Perry tune and he admits he had some hesitation about signing up for La Voix.
"I had lots of hesitation because I'm an old-school kind of guy," said Moore. "I'm a punk-rocker kind of guy and I know some of my old punk-rock friends are going to yell 'sell-out'right away. But I'm 40 now. If I was 20, I might agree with them. Now I feel if I want to keep singing, I have to keep it going. What better way to launch my career in Quebec than doing La Voix and showing the people that I can actually sing."
He didn't go in with huge expectations and so is pleasantly surprised to find himself in the final four. He has a classic raspy rock'n'roll voice and so it made sense that it was fellow raspy rockeur Éric Lapointe who picked him for his team in La Voix. He blew Lapointe away right at the start with his rendition of With a Little Help from my Friends (inspired by the Joe Cocker take, not the Ringo Starr-sung Beatles original). He also wowed the audience with his interpretation of Elton John's Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me.
But the real challenge has been singing the French-language songs, something Moore hasn't done a lot of in his career prior to La Voix.
"It's been different," said Moore.
"I find that my voice changes a bit. I change my tone of voice because I am trying to pronounce the words. I kind of go operatic. It's not the same as English music. You have to be precise with your wording and your pronunciation. So I have learned a lot from that. But I had fun doing it." bkelly@postmedia.com Twitter.com/brendanshowbiz
CREDIT: BRENDAN KELLY;The Gazette

