They are telling words for a government sitting on a huge majority.
"We have to stay humble," Premier François Legault told the other 74 members of his caucus when it met last week in Gatineau. "We are allowed to look at the polls but not comment on them.
"I won't always be like this.
There will be highs and there are lows. I don't want to see arrogance anywhere in the ranks."
The temptation is real. Four months into its mandate and the Coalition Avenir Québec is still basking in a political honeymoon with most voters.
As the National Assembly resumes sitting Tuesday for the CAQ government's first real year in power since winning the October election, a Léger public opinion poll published by the Québecor media group last weekend shows the government has a 63 per cent satisfaction rate, a number not seen since the first election of Jean Charest in 2003.
Had an election been held last week, the CAQ would have bagged 42 per cent of the vote, five percentage points more than it earned in the election (37 per cent).
But a strong mandate - even if it lingers - can be a mixed blessing too; hence Legault's warning.
The CAQ arrived in office promising to be different, decisive, taking decisions quickly, but that style of governing, which Radio-Canada political analyst Sébastien Bovet has tagged the "bing-bang" way of doing things, has its perils.
Take Legault's snap response last Thursday where he said there is no Islamophobia problem in Quebec.
Legault spent most of his day Friday walking that back after a chorus of people begged to differ.
On Monday, Agriculture Minister André Lamontagne also sounded the retreat, admitting he made an error when - in another hasty act - he took responsibility for the firing of whistleblower Louis Robert on his shoulders.
"In the heat of the action I poorly expressed myself," Lamontage said in Montreal.
So how does this bode for the really tricky stuff ahead, including the CAQ government's secularism bill, which would ban authority figures such as judges, police officers, correctional officers and elementary and high school teachers from wearing religious symbols? Legault's impatience to settle this question is clear. He repeats daily that Quebec has debated this question for years and it's time to move on to other issues.
He feels the election gave him a clear mandate to act after years of Liberal stalling.
"There is public support for this, which is important, (even if) there are small groups that will try to attack it," Legault said Sunday in an interview on the LCN news channel political show Le Joute. "But my intention is to have this settled by the summer so we can turn the page and start talking about real issues."
But the government's intentions on this question remain vague and are still catching people by surprise. Last week, Legault revealed private school teachers would not be subject to the ban on hijabs, kippahs and turbans, but those in the public system would.
And the government's recent probe of school boards, the police and judiciary, to find out how many people could be potentially affected by the ban, shows it is trying to beef up its arguments for wanting to act.
Legault has said he expects pockets of resistance to the bill, but nothing like the resistance the Parti Québécois experienced with its ill-fated charter of values, which would have banned symbols for all public servants.
But history shows disgruntlement about the PQ's plan emerged slowly after the bill enacting the charter was tabled and then became a tidal wave.
Could that happen again? The Parti Québécois opposition Monday again urged Legault to heed its advice and include a grandfather clause recognizing acquired rights for existing employees.
While the PQ supports the ban for authority figures, it does not want to see people fired or shuffled into other non-visible roles as the government has suggested.
"It might seem simple to apply a policy wall-to-wall, but there are many technicalities that are more than technicalities; they are called human factors," interim PQ Leader Pascal Bérubé said at a news conference Monday, setting the tone for the session.
"I don't think we want to create martyrs. I think we have to show some humanity while staying firm on the principles."
And opposition exists. On Monday the Fédération autonome de l'enseignement, the union representing 43,000 elementary and high school teachers, told reporters they fear the government will launch a "hijab hunt" in the public sector.
The government is attacking "a problem that does not exist" instead of dealing with the real needs of students, FAE president Sylvain Mallette told reporters in Quebec City.
Simmering in the background is another key figure with the Léger poll. While the government is sitting pretty with francophone voters, it is stuck in the dungeon at 19 per cent among non-francophones. Liberals have 64-per-cent support in that group.
There have been complaints that recent decisions, closing Riverdale High School plus ignoring appeals of tolerance for bilingual signage at the Lachute hospital, show a certain tone deafness to minority interests and sensitivities.
Watching from his new post as interim leader of the Quebec Liberals, Pierre Arcand said the CAQ "are going to have to be prudent. We don't manage Quebec like a business. A government is not a business."
Will the government be more cautious following its series of rookie errors on the ice? Dead ahead are other political files fraught with potential trouble: reducing the level of immigration, presenting legislation to transform school boards into service centres, prying more powers out of the hands of the federal government.
Perhaps an indicator of what lies ahead rests in a Radio-Canada interview granted by Education Minister Jean-François Roberge on Monday. Despite all the election hoopla, Roberge said the big education reforms he promised are going to take longer than he imagined because the government machine can't move any faster.
Immigration, Diversity and Inclusiveness Minister Simon Jolin-Barrette got a similar "reality check" two weeks ago.
Charged with reforming the immigration system and reducing the total number of new arrivals from 50,000 a year to 40,000, Jolin-Barrette said he discovered there are 18,000 unprocessed immigration files - some dating back to 2005 - sitting on the desks of his bureaucrats. pauthier@postmedia.com twitter.com/philipauthier
CREDIT: PHILIP AUTHIER;The Gazette

