Every Montrealer and their uncle felt the wrath of this week's snowmageddon one way or another, whether it was shovelling their way out of their home, trudging right up the middle of streets because sidewalks were impassable, or driving along the pothole-riddled, snowbank-lined roads.
I'll leave the bickering over the quality of snow removal to our city officials, except to note that anyone who lives in the West Island and drives downtown for work can see and feel the difference between the city of Montreal and the suburban municipalities.
As a parent and Montrealer, I have never been more preoccupied with weather alerts than I have been this year. Yes, some have been false alarms, but best to err on the side of caution.
This week's alert was the real thing, and by Tuesday, it seemed everyone was bracing for the onslaught.
My kids were jumping up and down when they heard the news that they were going to have a snow day Wednesday. I let out a sigh of relief because as crazy as it can get to have a hyper teen and pre-teen home while you're trying to work, there is nothing quite like knowing your kids are home safe while Mother Nature does her thing.
Not everybody is so fortunate as to be able to take time off from work if there is a weather advisory in effect, nor can every job be done from home, but when we hear about a major storm system moving in, with freezing rain warning or whiteout conditions, it's best to stay home if at all possible. There is no point arguing with someone who does not have a choice in the matter, but those who do have the opportunity but opt not to heed the warnings are merely being foolish.
A few weeks back, as I was leaving downtown late one evening after work, a dear friend messaged me and suggested I stay downtown and not risk driving back to the West Island because the weather was going to be particularly dangerous. I brushed aside the suggestion, and told her I appreciated her concern. After white-knuckling the steering wheel for the 90 minutes it took me to get home, I will think twice about doing that again. Later that evening, I noticed that several off-island Facebook groups were discussing whether to drive home, and a bunch of people were staying near the airport so as to cut short their commute.
Deciding whether to head out can be a life and death matter. I was saddened at the news that a dear family friend and longtime reader of the Montreal Gazette died last week in a multi-car pileup caused by poor weather conditions. She was returning home from the funeral of a relative in Ontario. We were devastated, and as news of her passing spread, the Montreal Pakistani/Indian community grieved the loss of this intelligent, eloquent woman who had given so much to those she loved.
I am amazed by the number of times I'll hear other parents driving across town to take their child to a sporting event during a storm or blizzard. Sports clubs need to cancel practices or games if there is a weather warning in effect. I've heard some say it's because they don't want to lose their deposit for the facility rental. We need to be more cautious when it comes to the safety and well-being of our children.
While we cannot control Mother Nature, we can control how much attention we pay to weather warnings. While we're blessed to have some of the best snow removal in the world (all jokes aside), we all need to do our parts to ensure the safety of ourselves and our families.
Stay warm, stay safe and stay dry. Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed is the founder and editor in chief of CanadianMomEh.com, a lifestyle blog. Twitter.com/canadianmomeh
CREDIT: FARIHA NAQVI-MOHAMED;The Gazette

