The Canadian Red Cross has started a fundraising campaign to provide financial support to Quebec flood victims when they eventually return home.
"The money could be used to buy food, furniture, make small repairs to the house, children's needs and personal services," said Pascal Mathieu, vice-president of the Red Cross in Quebec.
Public Security Minister Martin Coiteux asked Quebecers to contribute to the campaign.  
"I encourage every Quebecer to be generous and make a donation," he said at a press conference in Montreal.
Coiteux announced that the Quebec government is contributing $500,000 to the fund and will cover all the administrative fees.
"Every dollar you put in this fund will go to the victims of the flood," he promised.
The Red Cross says it has helped more than 1,400 residents who have had to flee their homes during record flooding in the province.
The Red Cross is putting residents up in hotels and offering food vouchers for families in need.
Red Cross volunteers are working in 12 welcome centres across Quebec that have been set up to help victims of flooding.
Donations can be made on the Red Cross's website at www.croixrouge.ca or by calling 1 800 418-1111.
Flood waters expected to peak by Wednesday
 
Earlier, Coiteux said Quebec's flood waters are expected to reach their peak between Monday and Wednesday and then will gradually begin to drop.
But Coiteux couldn't say when residents who have been forced from their homes will be able to return.
"We have to be prudent, the water is flowing quickly," he told a press conference in Montreal. He said the problems will last for a number of weeks.
Transport minister Laurent Lessard said the nine dams and reservoirs along the Ottawa River basin are structurally sound, but are being used to their maximum to try and slow the flow of water.
"We are talking about historic levels of water because of the important snow up north and the rains that have come down continuously in April and this past week in May," Lessard said.
"With the dams, we have been able to slow down the flow (of water) by over 2 ,500 cubic metres per second."
The water level on Lake of Two Mountains has increased by one metre because of the amount of water in the rivers this spring, said David Heurtel, Quebec's Environment Minister.
Couteux defended the government's handling of the flooding situation. "At one point, the forecast changed and we immediately asked for the support of the armed forces," he said. "The deployment was swift and efficient."
About 90 per cut of the troops are on the front line working with the firefighters, the police and volunteers to help the people, said Hercule Gosselin, a commander with the armed forces.
The head of Quebec's civil protection services said psychologists will be made available to speak with distressed homeowners who are victims of flooding.
Heurtel said the province is dealing with a historic water flow, and that dams on the Ottawa rivers have been able to reduce the amount of water in the river.
A spokesperson for the provincial police cautioned motorists to stay away from washed out roads.
A 37-year-old man and his two-year-old daughter are missing in the Gaspé after the man drove on a road that had been closed.
By the end of the day, there will be about 1,600 members of the Canadian Armed Forces on the ground helping out, said Hercule Gasselin, a commander with the armed forces.
Coiteux said he has been impressed by the number of volunteers who have come out to help their neighbours. "I was in Île Bizard and there were people from Ontario helping," he said.
Flood victims who don't have family or friends to stay with are being taken care of by the Red Cross and municipal authorities, Coiteux said. 
"In every municipality, they have housing facilities and we are working with the Red Cross everywhere," he said.
"When people go to their local centre they get information from the Red Cross. Nobody is left out. Everybody has a place to go and has food and Transport Minister Laurent Lessard couldn't say when the Galipeault Bridge, which connects Montreal Island with Ile Perrot, will reopen.
"We will do daily evaluations," he said.
To help drivers who can't use the Galipeault Bridge, Transport Quebec has announced that the Highway 30 toll bridge will be free today.
Hope on the horizon
 
As flood-weary West Island residents woke up to unseasonably cold temperatures and frost warnings Monday, the firm that has been monitoring Quebec's historic flooding over the past month threw a new element into their daily inventory of water levels: hope.
Hydro Méteo reported that while the Outaouais, Laurentians and Montreal area would see slight increases in water levels Monday, "the beginning of stabilization is expected today."
That possible respite coincides with the arrival of what Environment Canada described as "an unseasonably cool airmass" that moved over southern and western Quebec overnight Sunday, revising a five-day forecast that had called for a week of rain to one where the possibility of precipitation doesn't exceed 30 per cent until Saturday.
Downriver, however, riverfront municipalities between Montreal and Quebec City can expect to see flooding for the next few days as the St. Lawrence continues to rise.
Monday's forecast comes after Laval and Montreal declared states of emergency and Canadian Armed Forces personnel deployed on the West Island to aid residents and civil protection workers shore up dams and sandbags from Rigaud to Pierrefonds-Roxboro.
In total, flood waters have damaged more than 2,400 homes in 146 municipalities across Quebec and forced 1,500 people to leave their homes.
High water levels also forced Transport Quebec on Sunday night to close the Galipeault Bridge linking the western tip of Montreal with Île-Perrot. The shutdown forced eastbound motorists heading for Montreal to detour onto Highway 30 and cross the Île-aux-Tourtes bridge onto Highway 40. As of 7 a.m. there were reports the detour was already adding an hour to commuters' travelling time.
 
CREDIT: Montreal Gazette

