Indoors Saturday
Kamasi Washington (8:30 p.m. Metropolis, $49 to $70) - This L.A. saxophone visionary has been ushering in a new era of jazz since the release of his aptly titled 2015 double-album The Epic. His new EP, The Choice, shows more of the sweeping grandeur and creativity that has seen him sit in with everyone from Kendrick Lamar to Herby Hancock. Outdoors Saturday
Spanish Harlem Orchestra (9 and 11 p.m., TD Stage, corner Jeanne Mance St. and de Maisonneuve Blvd., free) - There will be dancing in the streets as this venerable New York/Nuyorican salsa ensemble brings the fire to the outdoor main stage. And they're calling for a heat wave? Of course they are.
Ghost Note feat. MonoNeon (10 p.m., Club Jazz Casino de Montreal, corner Bleury St. and René-Lévesque Blvd., free) - Two nights after rocking Metropolis with funky fusion jazz band Snarky Puppy, drummer Robert "Sput" Searight and percussionist Nate Werth present their new project Ghost Note, accompanied by bass fiend MonoNeon, a.k.a. Dywane Thomas Jr., who was among the last people to play with Prince. Indoors Sunday
Vinícius Cantuária (10 p.m., L'Astral, $42) - Veteran Brazilian singer-guitarist Vinícius Cantuária keeps the bossa nova torch alive, infusing it with the subtle jazz sensibility that has seen him collaborate with Brian Eno, Marc Ribot, David Byrne and Bill Frisell. In 2015, he released an album of covers of bossa godfather Antonio Carlos Jobim, including the essential Garota de Ipanema. Outdoors Sunday
The Suffers (9 and 11 p.m., TD Stage, corner Jeanne Mance St. and De Maisonneuve Blvd., free) - Texas jazz-funk-soul-pop crew The Suffers are part of the new wave of infectious crossover acts with real chops. Vocalist Kam Franklin conjures the spirit of namesake Aretha by way of Alabama Shakes'Brittany Howard. A prime example of the world-class free fare available nightly at the jazz fest.
La Chiva Gantiva (10 p.m., Scène du Monde, corner Clark St. and de Maisonneuve Blvd., free) - A trio of Colombians living in Brussels round up an eclectic crew to create a simmering groove unit mixing Latin, funk, world and hip-hop styles, singing and rapping en espagnol and en français. Their 2017 album Despegue features cameos from rapper Speech of '90s group Arrested Development, and Martin Perna of New York Afrobeat ensemble Antibalas. Indoors Monday
Herbie Hancock, Thundercat (7:30 p.m., Salle Wilfrid-Pelletier, Place des Arts, $82.85 to $105.85) - Rightfully promoted as a double bill, this meeting between jazz legend Herbie Hancock and wild-man singer-bassist-producer Thundercat has old-school-meetsnew-school written all over it. Thundercat has worked with Kendrick Lamar, Kamasi Washington, Erykah Badu, and Childish Gambino, aside from releasing his own psychedelic R&B. Outdoors Monday
Delgres (7 p.m., Hyundai Blues Stage, corner Clark St. and de Maisonneuve Blvd., free) - Guadeloupian blues - what more do we need to say? France-born singer-guitarist Pascal Danaë has toured with Gilberto Gil, Peter Gabriel and Youssou N'Dour. He and his trio bring funky African flavours to his distinctly modern interpretation of the blues. Perhaps the best thing you'll catch on the blues stage this week.
Nomadic Massive (9 and 11 p.m., TD Stage, free) - Montreal's sprawling jazz-funk-hip-hop collective never fails to get the party going, mixing politics with dance floor antics. This is multiculti urban music with a thrillingly all-inclusive mash-up vibe. It's no wonder the jazz fest rewarded them with a prestigious main stage slot to close out the long weekend.
AT A GLANCE The Montreal International Jazz Festival continues through July 7. For more info, visit montrealjazzfest.com
CREDIT: T'CHA DUNLEVY;The Gazette

