AT A GLANCE
Beat Cops launch Mean Streets Tuesday at Turbo Haus, 5011 Notre-Dame St. W., with No Aloha. Doors open at 8 p.m. Tickets cost $10 at the door.
"Crime doesn't wait, so why should we?" asks Beat Cops bassist Tim Fletcher.
Why indeed? And so it is that the Montreal all-stars have come to release their energetic and inspired debut long-player, Mean Streets, a mere 11 months after they started enforcing the laws of rock in our fair (and occasionally not-so-fair) city.
If Fletcher's name sounds familiar, it's because anyone who observed Montreal's ascendant music scene during the previous decade would know him as singer/guitarist for Juno Award-winning indie-pop band the Stills. He's not the only one with name brand recognition: Mikey Heppner (former singer/guitarist for hard-rock phenomenon Priestess) assumes identical duties in Beat Cops, with the backup of Patrick Bennett (former guitarist for hard-charging hardcore band Trigger Effect) and Max Hebert (the drums behind popular retro rockers Les Breastfeeders).
Perhaps lesser known is the fact that Fletcher and Heppner have a history, one that goes back 14 years to Heppner's upstart punk band the Dropouts.
"I was only in the Dropouts for about six months (in 2001), and we played something like four shows," says Fletcher. "It was actually one of the catchiest bands I've ever been in. The songs are total punk anthems and super fun - it was hilarious and awesome."
Shortly thereafter, the Dropouts spawned very differently angled "side projects," as Fletcher and Heppner like to call them: the Stills and Priestess. With the mothballing of both bands in 2011 and 2012, respectively, the door was left open for eventual rock 'n' roll reunification, and the musician friends stepped through it in July of last year.
Fletcher and Heppner aren't an obvious music-making combination, given the conspicuous stylistic differences between the bands they are best known for (and you can add Bennett and Hebert to that equation), but none of that matters in Beat Cops. There are better reasons for being partners in, and against, crime.
"We both listen to a lot of music and we're both ridiculous people," says Heppner.
"I really think that Mikey is a super-amazing, talented songwriter," says Fletcher. "I'm an admirer and appreciator of Mikey's creativity. That's what appealed to me when he said, 'Hey, do you wanna start a band?' ""And it was the total opposite for me," deadpans Heppner. "I really find Tim to be a hopeless hack."
"So it's a zero-sum game that really works out, y'know?" adds Fletcher. "One side of the seesaw's down and the other part's up."
For Beat Cops, Fletcher moves over from his usual guitar to bass, which he characterizes as his weapon of choice these days.
"He shreds on the bass and it's really, really fun seeing what crazy s-t he comes up with," enthuses Heppner.
"It's a mixture of skill and humour," Fletcher offers jokingly. Something similar could be said for Mean Streets. It's a recording that, despite some serious playing, does not take itself overly seriously. There is a thread of mischievous fun and good humour that winds its way through the often intricate writing.
"Max pointed that out," says Heppner. "We had other songs that didn't make the record and I remember him saying, 'These are all good songs, but I find that (the ones that are making the record) all have some sort of release, or humour and an edge to them, and the other ones just aren't funny.' ""It was earnestness versus tongue-in-cheekiness," says Fletcher.
On Mean Streets they've hit that songwriting sweet spot, composing tunes that rock aficionados and casual fans alike can appreciate. In terms of stylistic palette, we're in Jackson Pollock territory here, with a blizzard of colourings - hard rock, classic, pop, sludge and punk among them - combining for a curious and compelling whole.
You might hear a bit of the Byrds in the 12-string of the album-opening Emotional, a suggestion of CCR in the first notes of When You Left Home, and maybe quick zaps of Zappa and Thin Lizzy throughout. Never enough to call it imitation or homage, but rather clear evidence of indirect references that ricocheted offthe insides of their skulls a couple of times before lodging in the ear of the listener.
"I could sit down with a list of all the song titles and basically tell you what each part is in reference to in my mind, but we make music that you can't really call anything super-specific," says Heppner, skilfully sidestepping pigeonholes. "A ska band plays ska, and there are boundaries around what that means, but we're just a rock band and we don't really have a style. It's just a mashing of all influences."
"But it's still song-oriented, snappy tunes," says Fletcher.
"It's not musique concrete," adds Heppner.
"The most important thing, though, is that we uphold the law," finishes Fletcher. "It's hot out on the streets."
Credit: JAMIE O'MEARA; The Gazette
Illustration JULIE COTE / Mikey Heppner, second from right, and Tim Fletcher, have a shared history going back 14 years. They're back together in Beat Cops, along with Patrick Bennett, far left, and Max Hebert.

