For many, the summer months are a welcome change from Montreal's long and harsh winter - an opportunity to get outside and enjoy all the fun activities the city has to offer. For those who are lonely and isolated, however, summer can be an especially difficult time of year.
According to a recent report released by the Angus Reid Institute, which surveyed about 2,000 Canadians, nearly one in two people reported being either lonely, isolated or both. It is important to note that isolation and loneliness are not uniquely later-life experiences. Indeed, the findings reveal that people reported being both lonely and isolated across the lifespan. Other research shows that loneliness peaks in adolescence.
Isolation and loneliness can fluctuate over time as conditions change. For many, summer can be the loneliest time of year. Indeed, the myriad of group activities and events taking place during the summer, such as barbecues and picnics, may lead isolated people to feel as though everyone else is out having fun together while they are missing out. This perceived gap may be worsened by social media and its "highlight reel." Such perceptions can worsen existing mental-health issues and may even play a role in suicidality.
There are numerous negative health outcomes associated with loneliness and isolation. To begin, much research suggests that being isolated or lonely increases the likelihood of premature death. In other words, isolation and loneliness can quite literally kill us. Studies show that those who are socially isolated are 60 to 70 per cent more likely to die prematurely than those who are socially integrated, while lonely individuals are around 25 per cent more likely to die than non-lonely individuals.
With summer comes higher temperatures.
Heat exposure poses a serious risk for those who are isolated and living alone, especially if extreme and prolonged. In fact, isolation has been identified as a key determinant for heat-related mortality. In Montreal, single-person households are the most common. Living alone can lead people to live more isolated lives, especially elderly adults and those with health issues, which can be particularly devastating in extreme heat.
A recent report shows the majority of those who died in the Montreal heat wave last July lived alone and without air conditioning. Many also had existing physical and mental-health issues. Similar patterns were noted during the famous 1995 Chicago heat wave and this year's heat wave in France. Extreme heat is expected to occur more frequently as global warming worsens. Because of that, it is crucial we do more to protect vulnerable, isolated Canadians during the summer.
Another particularly worrisome outcome tied to isolation and loneliness is suicide. Contrary to popular belief, suicide rates tend to peak in spring and summer. Some research has linked these seasonal variations in suicidality to peaks in loneliness during the spring-summer transition. Eminent French sociologist Émile Durkheim posited there exists an inverse relationship between social integration and suicide: The less people feel integrated into society, the more likely they are to die by suicide.
Durkheim's observations may be useful for understanding the recent rise in suicide deaths as well as those involving drugs and alcohol - so-called "deaths of despair." Our society has indeed become increasingly individualistic with fewer and fewer Canadians belonging to religious communities, community associations and unions. These low levels of social participation may have a negative effect on well-being, especially in the summer when loneliness and isolation may be more salient.
All this suggests we need to pay more attention to those who are lonely and isolated, especially in the summer months. Working to make people feel a part of something larger could go a long way in improving the well-being of Canadians year-round and ensure the summer is enjoyable for all. Victoria Carmichael is the research manager of the Social Psychiatry Research and Interest Group (SPRING) at the Douglas Mental Health University Institute.
CREDIT: VICTORIA CARMICHAEL;The Gazette

