Summer, is that you? Are you finally here? We've been waiting ever so patiently for you to come, to settle in, to stay a while. It looks as if you may have arrived now. You're a bit late this year. We'd started to worry.
Several times we've thought you'd appeared. There'd be a hot, sunny day - on a weekend, even. But then the clouds would roll in again, the temperature would dip and the skies would open and soak everything.
There have been days when the morning started out nice, only for a thunderstorm to crash through in the afternoon. There have been days that started with showers. We make plans indoors only to have the gloom lift and the sun would peek through by lunchtime. These mixed signals have left us ... confused.
Are you playing coy with us? Because that's just mean.
In a city like Montreal, where winter's icy blast lasts half the year, what gets us through all those blizzards is thoughts of you. Being able to leave the house with bare skin, the feeling of being sun-kissed and a little sweaty, the long days stretching into humid nights - those daydreams sustain us through the months of shovelling and shivering. We really wouldn't be able to handle it if you passed us by this year.
Your all-too-brief passage always leaves us wanting more. But this year, we've just been left wanting.
Oh, I know the experts say there's nothing remarkable about you this year, summer. The average daily high for July so far is 25.3C, according to Environment Canada. There have been only two, slightly off heating-degree days this month - meteorologist-speak for when the mean daily temperature is below 18 C. But somehow it still seems as if you're giving us the cold shoulder. What gives? As for precipitation, we've had 55 mm of rainfall in the first 17 days of July. In 2016, we got 74.2 mm during the entire month. Given that spring was so wet, bringing horrible floods and producing terrible mosquitoes, please, give it a rest. Enough is enough.
Is it something we've said or done? I know humans have been messing with the climate, despite the dire warnings.
That might be throwing you off. It certainly seems as if you've been unpredictable of late. The forecasters have had trouble reading you. There were weeks when they kept saying the sun would come out tomorrow, that you'd be here imminently. Then you'd just not show up.
How rude. But look, no worries. We're willing to let bygones be bygones. There's still time for you to let us bask in your glorious warmth for a while. July is half over, but better late than never.
So the Fete nationale is over. It went OK, weather-wise. Canada Day was a washout - and with the country throwing a 150th birthday bash for itself, too. Ouch. Francofolies and Jazz Fest happened before you fully materialized. But there's still a lot to look forward to.
It is our 375th birthday, after all. We've got lots of great things planned. And we could enjoy the party all the more if you graced us with your presence.
The annual construction holiday is almost upon us. Thousands of us are packing up and getting ready to head off on vacation next week. You could really help those of us sticking close to home to make the most of our time off.
And for those spending the summer in the city, a few rays could really improve our moods. It would feel so good to go for a swim, have drinks on a terrasse, stroll in the Old Port, read in a public square, picnic on Mount Royal, ride our bikes along the Lachine Canal, light up the backyard barbecue, relax in Balconville.
So, please, stick around. We welcome you with open arms, despite the long delay. You can extend your stay for as long as you like. Autumn won't mind. ahanes@postmedia.com
Credit: ALLISON HANES; The Gazette
Illustration JOHN MAHONEY / Mustafaa Abbas coped with showers on a late June day. Allison Hanes says Montrealers are ready - really ready - for some sun.