Tania Lajoie knows she must adapt her driving in the winter, but she has found it more dangerous than ever just navigating her neighbourhood streets lately.
A mix of winter weather left many of the narrow streets in Notre-Dame-de-Grâce treacherous on Monday, a full week after the last major snowfall.
Residents who spoke with the Montreal Gazette reported that even after snow crews removed snowbanks that had piled up, driving conditions were not only difficult, but downright dangerous.
And with a forecast of rain, freezing rain and plummeting temperatures, they fear the situation could get even worse in the coming days.
On Hampton St., several drivers complained they're afraid to drive on many of the north-south streets in the borough because of icy ruts left on the road that cause their cars to move from side to side as the wheels get caught in the grooves.
Others complained about the bottom of their cars scraping snow and ice left on the road.
"I think it's horrible," Lajoie said after parking her car at the YMCA's lot on Hampton Ave. "They clean one side of each road, but they don't clean the middle. There are thick chunks of ice in the middle of the road."
Resident Tim Halal said drivers must drive as slowly as possible on the smaller streets. "I feel like I'm going sideways, and if I don't go a certain speed, I'm going to slide into another car."
Marie Hélène, another N.D.G. resident, said: "I find it the worst it has ever been."
"Right after the snow-clearing, it feels that it hasn't been done," she added. "I have lived in N.D.G. my whole life, and it's been really bad this year.
"It's not like they're not clearing the snow; it's just that they're not clearing properly. Pretty much all the side streets in N.D.G. are insane."
Hélène said parking a car is a challenge with the icy ruts on the road. "Your car is like a train on a track, but if you try to get out of that track, it's so easy to go flying somewhere else."
Borough mayor Sue Montgomery said she is aware of the problem with icy ruts.
"We had that dump of snow, and then pouring rain and it immediately froze, so we couldn't clear it," Montgomery said.
"I understand the idea of people having no control. I was in a couple of taxis that spun out. It's quite scary. You just have to go slow."
She added that icy conditions meant that graders used to scrape the snow off the road are also at risk of slipping into parked cars.
Making matters worse, in recent weeks the borough has had to deal with equipment breakdowns: two graders and one snowblower were out of commission, Montgomery said.
Christian Arsenault, the city councillor for the Loyola district, said the borough has among the oldest snowblowers in the city - about 30 years old, whereas such equipment is generally replaced after about 15 years.
Snow-clearing in the Loyola district and several streets east of Grand Blvd. is done by the city's blue-collar workers, and Arsenault said crews are working hard, but they are limited by out-of-date equipment.
"I know our blue collars are doing everything we can, but we are giving them bad equipment, and we've been doing so for years," he said.
"We need a better explanation (from the centre city) about why we don't have acceptable, functional equipment."
Last week, all boroughs were served notice by a letter from Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante that snow-removal operations have been sub-par.
However, there were complaints on Monday about clearing operations in her own borough, Ville-Marie, where streets remained snow-and ice-clogged five days after she issued her warning.
Montgomery noted borough officials can't spot all the problems everywhere, so citizens should flag her by email or by calling 311 when they see a problem.
Both Arsenault and Montgomery said they do not know why crews seem to be leaving so much snow behind after a removal operation - another common complaint - and said they will look into the matter. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder Facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

