Driving in the Montreal region is not for the faint of heart - especially once winter hits, bringing months of slippery, snowy road conditions, whiteouts, black ice, freezing rain and worse.
Since we can't spend five months a year inside at home waiting for spring, we drive.
Or at least, we think we do. But according to former pro race car driver Claude Bourbonnais, who now operates a winter car control clinic (claude-bourbonnais.com) on the ice near Ch. de l'Anse in Vaudreuil-Dorion, most people aren't really driving at all.
"They're just guiding the car along in a straight line, and usually nothing is happening. They're having a Starbucks and a cellphone conversation. So when something does happen, they're not ready," said Bourbonnais.
Last Friday's class included drivers with a broad range of experience, who came from all over the Montreal area and even as far as Sherbrooke.
Jean-Christophe Trahan just got his driver's licence last spring. He decided to take the course after an acquaintance of his lost control on an icy back road and crashed, killing one of the three young friends in his car.
"It scared me and I want to be able to handle a situation like that if it happened to me," said Trahan. "If I encounter a patch of ice, I don't want to be surprised. I want to know how to react."
Another student, Julie Quenneville, survived a terrifying head-on collision on an icy country road near St-Denis-de-Brompton two years ago, and now suffers from anxiety when she has to drive in winter.
"I want to regain my confidence as a driver in wintry, icy conditions," she said.
Bourbonnais said although his winter driving course tends to draw new drivers, newcomers unused to Montreal winters, and those who have experienced losing control on icy roads, everyone can benefit from testing their reflexes on the ice in a safe environment.
The class meets in groups of five or six at an old ice-fishing hut with brightly painted trim, which Bourbonnais calls his "winter palace."
Most of the four-hour winter driving course is spent behind the wheel, repeatedly coaxing the car to slide, spin or skid so the students can practise regaining control.
When a car begins to slide on ice, most drivers instinctively turn the wheel and hit the brakes, sending the car into an uncontrollable spin, said Bourbonnais. The key is to keep a cool head, ease off the gas, focus your gaze on where you want to go, and turn a little less to stop the skidding, he said.
It's a counterintuitive response for most people, so most of Bourbonnais's class is spent drilling: zigzagging through a slalom course on the ice, driving in a big circle designed to provoke the car to slide, repeatedly spinning out and recovering after a hard turn at moderate speed, and so on.
As for this reporter, at the end of four hours of slippery driving, I came away feeling both humbled and more confident. It is not easy to get the knack of turning the wheel just the right amount at just the perfect time when the car begins to slide and spin. It really does take your full attention - and both hands on the wheel. Best to put the cellphone away and finish the coffee before you hit the road.
CREDIT: BRIANA TOMKINSON;The Gazette

