TAVERNE F
Two stars out of four
$$$
Address: 1485 Jeanne-Mance St. (Place des Festivals)
Phone: 514-289-4558
Website: tavernef.com
Open: Weekdays 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.; Sun.-Wed. 5 to 10 p.m.; Thurs.-Sat. 5 to 11 p.m. Licensed: Yes
Credit cards: All major
Wheelchair access: Yes
Parking: On the street; several lots nearby.
Vegetarian friendly: Yes
Reservations: Essential
Price range: petiscos to start $5-$16; petiscos to follow $12-$18; desserts $7-$12.
The downtown festival rigmarole that occurs each summer in Montreal is as much of a drawback as a draw for many. You can jump right in or avoid the scene altogether, but taking refuge in one of the area's restaurants to watch things unfold is a great compromise.
During festival season, there are a few restaurants where you are really in the heart of the action. I reviewed the promising new Blumenthal in this space a few weeks ago (since then, it has opened a snazzy terrasse), but the best-placed eating spots for festivalgoers are probably Brasserie T and Taverne F. Located in two refurbished construction containers, these restaurants made waves back when they opened in 2010. I have dined at both several times since then, especially in winter, as they are a short stroll from Place des Arts. But it is in summer that they really come into their own. Both feature summer terrasses overlooking Place des Festivals, where the show isn't in a theatre next door, but often right in front of your table.
Taverne F is part of Groupe Ferreira, the empire headed by restaurateur Carlos Ferreira, with his daughter Sandra as second in command. I'm a fan of Ferreira Cafe, arguably downtown's swishest restaurant, always filled to the rafters while serving some of the best modern and traditional Portuguese food and wines on the planet. Groupe Ferreira also includes the chic cafe/lunch spot Vasco da Gama as well as their latest, Campo, a Portuguese grilled-chicken restaurant.
Away from the hub of the other restaurants, Taverne F has always felt like a distant cousin in the family. It began life as F Bar, with chef Gilles Herzog overseeing a small-plate menu with a Portuguese focus. I recall great ideas and dishes from F Bar's early days, save for some unevenness in the cooking. I don't know what the kitchen layout is in these container locales, but the dining rooms are a little cramped. Still, the restaurant seemed destined to succeed.
But in 2014 Ferreira and company decided to mix things up, renaming the restaurant Taverne F and unveiling a new menu featuring petiscos: small Portuguese dishes similar to Spanish tapas, designed for sharing. Chef Joao Dias of Ferreira Cafe was now overseeing the menu, and the wine list was given an overhaul as well.
Having sampled the old and new menus, I never really sensed that much of a difference. Call it F Bar or Taverne F - they seem pretty much interchangeable - though I've always been surprised they didn't give this restaurant more of a wine-bar mission, as that genre of restaurant is hugely popular these days and Portuguese wines not only offer excellent value, but are definitely worth discovering. Now, three years since the last makeover, I wondered how Taverne F was evolving, especially at this time of year, when the crowds and tourists descend.
Arriving on a quiet Tuesday just after the end of the jazz fest, we grabbed a seat between the terrasse and dining room and perused the paper placemat menus. Despite chilly temperatures that prevented us from sitting on the terrasse (in July!), I ordered their version of a mojito, which arrived in an oversized mug filled with ice, mint and, despite the Captain Morgan logo on the glass, not much in the way of rum. After a few sips of that, we opted for two wines by the glass: a nice white Alentejo and a Cuvee Ferreira from the family vineyard, available - and recommendable - in both white and red. The wine list isn't long, but the selection is food-friendly and fairly priced.
We ordered three starters: pea soup, octopus salad and salmon gravlax. Garnished with salt cod, chives and coriander, the soup had a velvety texture, but the portion was generous and pea flavour gets repetitive (OK, dull) after the first, say, seven spoonfuls.
The octopus salad was equally ho-hum. Made with slices of cold poached octopus paired with a completely tasteless chickpea and eggplant puree, the dish was finished off with a tomato/red pepper coulis, wilted arugula and pickled onions. As promising as that salad sounded on paper, the reality was a dreary mix falling dismally short of its potential.
Same for the gravlax. The marinated salmon was missing any kind of herb flavouring that would have added pizzazz, and the accompanying Parmesan tuiles were stale. Instead of the listed "egg parfait," the composition included one of those jelly-textured slow-cooked eggs. Why? The romaine drizzled with Parmesan dressing underneath the salmon was good, but the dish lacked cohesiveness.
Discouraged by the starters, I anticipated the worst with the mains. Happily, not so.
The first to arrive was a cassoulet of pork and clams. This Portuguese classic, served with large white beans and a tomato sauce, was simply delicious. The meat was tender, the clams were juicy and the sauce, enhanced with cumin, bacon and parsley, was perfect. Yum! Then came a dish called caldeirada, featuring salmon, shrimp, clams and mussels in a fish fume, flavoured with coconut milk and lemon grass. I really enjoyed the switch of flavour profile, with more of a Thai feel to this dish than Portuguese. But the broth was served as hot as a McDonald's coffee. Hot is good, but scorching hot, not so much; the shrivelled shellfish obviously took a beating in the heat.
For a third main, we opted for the Taverne F hamburger, which seems like the kind of dish you could grab here with a nice glass of red Portuguese wine for a preor post-show bite. The burger toppings include Sao Jorge cheese, shallots, onion confit and tarragon mayonnaise. With its burnt bun and wilted toppings, the burger placed in front of me didn't look like much. And the fries alongside looked like they had been sitting around a while. But one bite and I was hooked. Looks can be deceiving in the burger game, and this one scored. Like the fish dish, it was blisteringly hot (which made me think a microwave is getting good use in this kitchen), but the flavours were excellent. The fries, though, were definitely past their prime.
Desserts provided a welcome hit of sweetness, but not much more. A soft caramel cake drizzled with liquid caramel was good, but the accompanying sorbet (pear, I think) didn't add much in the way of excitement. As for the quenelle of chocolate mousse sprinkled with salt and olive oil and meringue, I would have preferred a smaller portion and better-quality chocolate.
Service was competent, but certainly more frosty than friendly. All taken, I found the Taverne F experience lacking. With a name like Ferreira behind this establishment, expectations are high. But at present it feels a little laissez-faire, a little lazy, a little neglected. With a cuisine this dynamic to work with and a location this cool, I just don't get it. A serious injection of TLC would make a world of difference.
You can hear Lesley Chesterman on ICI Radio-Canada Premiere's Medium Large (95.1 FM) Tuesdays at 10 a.m., and on CHOM (97.7 FM) Wednesdays at 7:10 a.m. criticsnotebook@gmail.com twitter.com/LesleyChestrman
Credit: LESLEY CHESTERMAN; The Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Housed in a refurbished construction container, Taverne F offers a prime view of Place des Festivals.; PHOTOS: PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Taverne F's caldeirada brings together salmon, shrimp, clams and mussels in a fish fume flavoured with coconut milk and lemon grass.; PHOTOS: PIERRE OBENDRAUF / A cassoulet of pork and clams brought out the best in a traditional Portuguese combination.

