The city of Montreal will begin opening splash pads in parks as soon as possible to help deal with the heat wave and give families a chance to cool off while they also cope with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Montreal public health director Mylène Drouin made the announcement on Tuesday.
"We have already recommended to the city to open the water parks as quickly as possible to let families refresh themselves," she said.
As Drouin spoke, the city issued a release stating "the boroughs will gradually open their water games starting (Tuesday)."
Splash pads provide children with the opportunity to play in running water and spray their playmates without requiring supervision by lifeguards.
During her news conference, Drouin was asked if someone would have to supervise the splash pads to make sure social distancing measures are respected. She replied that she will leave the supervision up to parents.
The city will be opening splash pads in parks where slides, swings and other playground equipment have been roped off for weeks.
"I think it will be a question of limiting the play zone to one family for a period of time," Drouin said.
She said the overall pandemic situation in Montreal is "progressing in a good direction. While the number of tests are increasing, we still have slow constant reduction in the number of cases each day.
"We are seeing the same drop in terms of new hospitalizations, new admissions to emergency rooms and in intensive care for COVID-19," Drouin said. "We ask that the public remain vigilant, because we are in a period where we are reopening several sectors of activity. The virus is still circulating and outbreaks are still a possibility."
Drouin also announced that during the heat wave the city will reduce the operating hours of its mobile unit that tests for COVID-19 in the hardest-hit areas.
Tests conducted by the unit on Wednesday and Thursday will only be done between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.
She also said the criteria to be tested in Montreal has not changed.
"People who are symptomatic are the priority," she said. "And people who have come in contact with COVID-19 or believe they have come in contact with COVID-19 are invited to be tested in clinics without appointments. But we are not at all (in a situation) where we can open it up to the entire public.
"If there are outbreaks in the daycares, the workplaces, with the contacts or the workers in those milieus, it is them that we will prioritize. The objective of testing is always to cut the chains of transmission as soon as possible."
On Tuesday, the city also announced it has extended the state of emergency for the Montreal agglomeration to May 30. The state of emergency was first declared on March 27. pcherry@postmedia.com

