During a heat wave that's breaking records for July temperatures, the Montreal Gazette talked with some Montrealers whose jobs give them no relief - and one that still requires a jacket and tuque.
CONSTRUCTION
Mike Lasorsa is installing ceramic walls and floors on the sixth floor of an apartment building. It's so hot at work he changes his shirt three times a day.
People who live in the apartments he's helping to renovate bring him Popsicles and Mr. Freeze Pops.
"People see you're sweating a lot.
They're very supportive," Lasorsa said. "If I see any of my co-workers who might look like it's too much for him, I'll tell him to go sit down and make sure he's hydrated. We look out for each other."
Working with ceramics, Lasorsa uses a lot of water to wash off walls and glue. That's one of the reasons he prefers working in the heat to the winter, when the water and his hands will freeze.
"The most important thing is to always keep yourself hydrated, compared to when it's freezing cold and you have a hard time feeling your fingertips," Lasorsa said.
For Jocelyn Boucher, who's building concrete frames inside a building in Ahuntsic, heat waves slow down the pace of construction work. He and his coworkers start at 6 a.m. to finish around 2 p.m., working fewer than eight hours per day, and take two or three more breaks than usual. He'll drink at least four litres of water before noon.
Boucher wears steel-toed boots, a helmet and safety goggles that fog up from the heat and humidity. If he works outdoors, he'll wear long sleeves to protect his arms.
"In the direct sun, it's really horrible," Boucher said.
The hardest part of working during a heat wave, Boucher said, is starting up again after eating lunch.
After work, Boucher goes "right away to the pool. It's the first thing." COMPOST "It's a physical job, it's one where you do have to use your strength and you do have to hustle," said Gabriel Michaud of Compost Montreal.
Compost collectors with his organization travel between businesses to pick up organic waste, then bring it to their compost site and clean out their trucks.
"The effect of the heat can be very draining on the person, even when you're used to it," Michaud said.
When their customers leave their brown compost bins outside, the sun heats up the bins, speeds up decomposition and attracts fruit flies. The smells and insects make it harder for collectors, so they appreciate bins kept indoors or in the shade and kept clean. FOOD TRUCKS At a food truck in downtown Montreal, the truck's interior was 15 or 20 degrees hotter than outside, according to Mitchell Litwin of Le Cheese. Le Cheese serves treats like grilled cheese and Philly cheese steak, but tucked away in freezers and refrigerators, Litwin said the cheese was in no danger from the heat. As for the workers, they rotate to make sure no one person stays in "the hot corner" grilling food for too long, Litwin said. They drape their necks in cold, wet towels and drink lots of water.
Parked in Dorchester Square to serve the lunch crowd, Litwin said he wouldn't trade it for a job inside.
"We're serving suits all day long, and it's like, oh my god. Take your AC, I'd rather be out here," Litwin said. CRAFT ICE While many Montrealers are taking precautions against heat stroke this week, there's one type of worker guarding against the threat of catching a cold: people who make ice.
At Les Marchands, a company that makes ice cubes shaped for cocktails, a small team breaks down large chunks of ice in a room set to -18 C. Inside they wear insulated windbreakers and pants, boots and tuques.
"You don't want to get the flu in the middle of July just because you weren't dressed enough working in the cold room," said Pierre-Olivier Prince of Les Marchands.
"Working in the cold room is pretty cool in the summertime," Prince said.
CREDIT: DARYA MARCHENKOVA;The Gazette

