For those who are courageous - and hydrated - enough to brave the heat on Sunday, here is a list of some of the activities on and off the island in celebration of Canada Day. Be warned: Environment Canada has issued a heat wave for the Montreal region for Canada Day weekend, with daytime highs of 30 to 35 C feeling more like 40 because of the humidity. The agency advises taking part in outdoor activities during the cooler hours of the day.
DAYLONG PARTIES TOPPED OFF WITH FIREWORKS
From 11:30 a.m. to just after 10 p.m., Montrealers can enjoy family-friendly activities such as street hockey, inflatable games, airbrush tattoos and photo booths in the Old Port at 333 de la Commune St. W.
For those who'd like to learn more about the nation, they can partake in virtual reality workshops about Canada's Armed Forces and watch a swearing-in ceremony of new Canadians.
Attendees will be treated to an evening of music before capping off the night with a firework display from the Jacques-Cartier pier at 10 p.m. More information at: canadadaymontreal.org.
On the North Shore, a similar event is taking place at Centre de la nature at 901 du Parc Ave. in Laval, starting at noon with music at 8 p.m. and fireworks at 10 p.m.
In Longueuil, a parade will travel about four kilometres from René-Veillet Park (1050 de Parklane St.) to Empire Park (195 Empire St.), leading residents to a party full of games, street performers and workshops. A concert beginning at 5:30 p.m. will lead up to fireworks, starting at 9:30 p.m.
CANADA DAY PARADE THROUGH DOWNTOWN
The Canada Day parade will travel through downtown, beginning at the corner of Fort and Ste-Catherine Sts. at 11 a.m., and travel east along Ste-Catherine St. and end at Place du Canada, near René-Lévesque Blvd. and Peel St. There, attendees will be treated to free slices of a giant cake between 1:30 and 2 p.m. More details at montrealcanadadayparade.com.
MUSIC AND A BARBECUE IN MONTREAL WEST
Montreal West will host a barbecue with music and games at 4 p.m. at Strathearn Park, on the corner of Strathearn Ave. N. and Parkside St.
The town will have its own fireworks at 10 p.m., just down the street from the earlier festivities at Hodgson Field on Bedbrook Ave.
ART IN THE CENTRE-SUD
For a change of pace, Montrealers can walk through Mtl en Arts, an open-air art exhibit featuring 90 artists, along Ste-Catherine St. between St-Hubert St. and Papineau Ave. between noon and 6 p.m..
CREDIT: Postmedia News

