Quebecers have decided to try on a new shade of blue.
Fuelled by a desire for change, the Coalition Avenir Québec deftly heaved the governing Liberals out of office Monday with enough seats to form a majority government.
And despite predictions of a nailbiter of an election, or even a minority regime, it was all over early - around 8:30 p.m. - with the CAQ winning a stunning 73 seats as the pale-blue wave that started in the east washed across the province.
The Liberals were reduced from 68 seats in the house to their core ridings in Montreal and a scattering of others for a total of 32, as francophones turned massively to the CAQ in nearly all regions of Quebec. The Liberals will form the official opposition.
Liberal Leader Philippe Couillard, who was re-elected in his riding of Roberval, conceded victory early, calling CAQ Leader and Premier-designate François Legault to offer his co-operation for a smooth transition of power.
Later, addressing a crowd of Liberals in his home riding, a sombre Couillard said he is personally assuming responsibility for the loss.
He said he is giving himself a few days to reflect on his future, but it appears highly unlikely he will be able to continue leading the party, which has little history for tolerating such losses.
"I am not bitter," Couillard told the sullen crowd. "I ask you not to be either. I am proud and I ask you to be too."
"Together we did what we had to do. I finish my mandate as premier with my head held high."
As for the once-mighty Parti Québécois, it was a telling blow as the party fell from 28 seats in the house to about 10 - the final chapter of a fall from grace that started way back in 1998. It risks losing official status in the legislature.
Worse, PQ Leader Jean-François Lisée lost in his home riding of Rosemont as Québec solidaire challenger and former La Presse columnist Vincent Marissal, who was ridiculed for making the leap into politics, trumped him.
Lisée becomes the second PQ leader in a row to not only lose an election, but also his seat. The last one was Pauline Marois in 2014.
Faced with the devastating defeat, Lisée announced he would be stepping down as leader.
"The verdict in Rosemont also puts an end to the greatest job I ever had: leader of the PQ," a bittersounding Lisée told his supporters.
The PQ was also wiped off the island of Montreal, including in the fortress east-end riding of Pointeaux-Trembles, which fell to CAQ candidate Chantal Rouleau. The riding represents the CAQ's beachhead in Montreal.
In fact, the election revealed the PQ has completely lost control of a large swath of Quebec's left-wing progressive vote, replaced by the fresh-faced Québec solidaire, whose co-spokespersons Manon Massé and Gabriel Nadeau-Dubois both won re-election.
Not only did QS hold its three island seats of Mercier, Gouin and Sainte-Marie-Saint-Jacques, it added seven more ridings to the stable, including Laurier-Dorion (a former Liberal riding) and Hochelaga-Maisonneuve (a former PQ riding) in the city.
But the big news for the 12-yearold organization was that it broke through in the rest of the province. QS candidate Catherine Dorion won in the Quebec City riding of Taschereau, Sol Zanetti won in the riding of Jean-Lesage and Christine Labrie took Sherbrooke, where the student vote turned out in droves.
QS was also fighting the good fight against a Liberal cabinet minister in the northern riding of Rouyn-Noranda, where voters seized QS as the best party for the environment and the working class.
The win is historic in several ways. It is the first time in 50 years that Quebec will not be ruled by either a Liberal or PQ government, as the old federalism/sovereignty debate took on the allure of ancient history for voters - particularly youth.
The results also show new parties (the CAQ and QS) are in vogue and the old ones (Liberal and PQ) are out - a line repeated day in, day out by Legault over the 39-day campaign.
On his third attempt to become premier, Legault, a 61-year-old millionaire and former airline executive, won his gamble after losing twice before, in 2012 and 2014. He will become Quebec's 43rd premier.
A no-nonsense, frank talker, Legault campaigned on a plan that wasn't that different from a classic Liberal theme: economic development and job creation. It's not well understood, but his party wants the legal age for cannabis consumption to be 21 rather than 18.
He is expected to move quickly with his plans, calling back the legislature before Christmas to present key pieces of legislation and either an economic update or a new budget.
Quebecers'desire for change - which has hovered around the 60 per cent level for months - proved to be the biggest factor in the vote.
On the other hand, a lot hinged on the level of voter participation after a campaign that didn't really catch fire in the minds of many. For the record, in 2014 the participation level was 71.43 per cent. Monday it hovered at 68 per cent.
The polls had the Liberals, which have governed Quebec for nearly 15 years, in a dead heat with the CAQ for most of the campaign.
Another battle roared for third and fourth place, between the Parti Québécois and Québec solidaire on Quebec's overcrowded left wing.
Where the CAQ dominated, however, was in the critical francophone vote, which determines who will rule the province.
While most pollsters cautiously predicted a possible CAQ minority government, they lowballed the possibility of a CAQ majority. But pollsters also say 33 per cent of Quebecers do not decide until the last weekend of the election, so it is possible they missed the wave.
Basking in her win, Massé struggled Monday to speak to a cheering crowd in Montreal.
"Québec solidaire is not the party of the Plateau-Mont-Royal," Massé told a packed hall. "You have given Quebecers the desire to walk again."
QS correctly understood a sea change was about to happen and ran with it. According to Quebec's chief electoral office, 28 per cent of the eligible voting population was between the ages of 18 and 35, and for the first time in many years they turned out to vote.
Described as unprecedented in recent Quebec history, the campaign broke ground on a number of levels. It was the first fixed-date election in the province - a situation that created almost a year of pre-campaign jockeying.
It also broke records for the number of female candidates. Out of 940 candidates seeking office, 47 per cent were women - an increase from 2014, when the total was 29.8 per cent. In nine ridings, all candidates were women. pauthier@postmedia.com twitter.com/philipauthier
CREDIT: PHILIP AUTHIER;The Gazette

