Forty-three years since his last game in a Canadiens net, Rogie Vachon still has a handle on what it's like to be a goaltender in Montreal.
"They love the goalie, but if you give up two or three goals, all of a sudden you're a bum," he says with a laugh of Habs fans and perhaps the media, too.
"It's tough to play in Montreal - very, very tough when I played and I don't think that part has changed at all."
Vachon had just stepped through Canada Customs at Montreal-Trudeau Airport Friday evening, offa flight from his home in Venice, Calif., for a Saturday memorabilia signing at Centre Pierre Charbonneau, in the shadow of the Maurice Richard Arena.
This would be almost a parachute drop: in at 8 p.m. Friday, to the east end to sign a variety of photos and pucks for later sale, signatures on more product early Saturday, an hour meeting and signing for fans before noon, then on a 2 p.m. flight back to Los Angeles, driven to the airport by his brother-in-law.
It was Vachon's first visit to Montreal since this same weekend in 2009, when he dashed through almost as quickly for a similar event.
"It's the way I like to do it," he said, just a small overnight bag on his shoulder, speaking with an accent that blends his native Quebec with his long-ago adopted home of California.
The 69-year-old native of Palmarolle, in the Abitibi region, doesn't do many shows these days. But that's not for lack of effort by promoters who try to coax appearances by the threetime Stanley Cup champion and co-winner with Gump Worsley of the 1967-68 Vezina Trophy.
Indeed, Vachon is very rarely seen on the memorabilia circuit that's populated by many of his contemporaries, their autographs a hot property with collectors.
"I have invitations all the time but I'm very lazy," he said, laughing again.
"Still, I'm amazed at the mail that finds me from all over the place. Last week I had something from a guy in Switzerland who wanted me to sign a Canadiens logo. And in the package he sent me a box of Swiss chocolate - for two little autographs."
Hockey cards and photos arrive constantly, "but I also sign a lot of biscuits," Vachon said of Canadiens-and Kings-crested pucks. He'll autograph each one carefully around the logo, not across it, "because it just looks neater that way."
You consider this elegant man, 5-foot-7 and today not much over his 170-pound playing weight, and you wonder a goalie this compact made his living guarding NHL nets from 1967-82, for the Canadiens, then Los Angeles Kings, with two-season stops in both Detroit and finally Boston in his twilight years.
As we spoke, he sifted through a couple dozen vintage photos I'd brought him: Here was Vachon with the 1964 N.D.G. Monarchs, a Junior A squad; as a bare-faced rookie with the Canadiens in the late 1960s, grimacing with pucks flying and bodies crashing around him; a little later, prowling the Habs net, in a deep crouch with the crossbar almost even with his head; in the dressing room,
his primitive equipment spilled at his feet; back in Montreal in a Kings jersey, dealt by Montreal to L.A. on Nov. 4, 1971, for Denis DeJordy, Dale Hoganson, Noel Price and Doug Robinson.
"I've never seen any of this stuff," Vachon said of this 8x10 glossy history, shaking his head.
And then he came to a photo of teammate Serge Savard crashing into Vachon's Forum goalpost in 1970, the exquisite pain on the defenceman's face reflecting the fact his leg was shattering in five places.
"You'd try to save players when you could, push them past the net, but the play was coming right at me," said Vachon, intently focused in the photo on the incoming New York Rangers rush.
He would become enormously popular during 6 1/2 seasons in Los Angeles, making hockey a place to be in Tinseltown long before Wayne Gretzky'd arrival. Vachon was the first King to have his jersey retired and, after his playing days, he'd fill most every front-office job for the team, from goaltending coach to president.
He's probably best be known for his brilliance in the 1976 Canada Cup, leading Team Canada to the championship with his .963 save percentage, 1.39 goalsagainst and two shutouts that named him the tournament's best goalie and earned him MVP honours on his team.
Inexplicably, he is not a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame, no matter that his numbers compare favourably to the many from his era who are enshrined.
Vachon left the game for good in 2008, having most recently been a Kings ambassador. But he still makes the occasional appearance, at the beginning of this season handing offthe club's 2013-14 Stanley Cup banner with fellow legend Marcel Dionne to current players for its homeopener raising to arena rafters. I tell Vachon that 40 years ago to the night, he was in the Kings net, turning aside 53 Buffalo shots in a 7-2 Los Angeles victory.
"In those days, 40 shots was just a normal night," he replied. "There'd be nights of 50."
Memorable was the game of Dec. 1, 1971, at the Forum, the night after he had married Nicole Blanchard in Burlington, Vt.
Hours after their wedding, the newlyweds were driven by a friend, Quebec race-car sensation Jacques Duval, through a snowstorm back to Montreal, where Vachon would face a blizzard of 50 Canadiens pucks in a 5-3 Habs victory less than a month after his trade to the Kings.
"That was a nice wedding present," Vachon joked. "Welcome home!" He and Nicole are the grandparents of three, ages 10 to 4 1/2. Calvin, the 9-year-old of their son, Nick, is a goalie in California, on a team that plays kids a year and two their senior.
"He gets a lot of work and he's a lot of fun to watch," Vachon said. "This season I bought him a new pair of pads and they're 32 inches (tall). That the same size I wore in the NHL."
He says you'd not know he was a big-league goalie if you visited his home; Nicole has the walls decorated with the work of Quebec-native painter Normand Boisvert.
"But I have lots of stuff," said Vachon, who auctioned much in 2010 but has kept cherished sticks, jerseys and a mask.
He says he watches "everything" on TV and gets to Kings games on his season tickets if they're not used by his kids and grandchildren, all huge hockey fans.
They all enjoy the work of Kings goalie Jonathan Quick, who last Thursday became the team's all-time shutout king, his 33rd one better than Vachon.
Quick trails Vachon in only two Kings goalie stats now: games and minutes played, and those seem likely to be overhauled this season, too.
You'll find no one happier about it than the man whose standards he's knocking offone by one.
"Quick can win games all by himself," Vachon said.
He'd know a thing or two about that, the records showing he did the same for his NHL clubs on more than one night.
dstubbs@montrealgazette.com twitter:com Dave_Stubbs
Credit: DAVE STUBBS; The Gazette
Illustration PHIL CARPENTER, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Former Montreal Canadiens goaltender Rogie Vachon, right, signs a Stanley Cup replica as Robert Girard holds it, at a sports collectibles show at Centre Pierre Charbonneau in Montreal on Saturday.

