AT A GLANCE
Learn more about Montreal museums at museesmontreal. org. Montreal's Other Museums: Off the Beaten Track (Vehicule Press, 2013) by Montreal writer Rachel Alkallay, is an illustrated pocket guide to the city's lesser-known museums.
Washington, D.C. is a city rich in museums: On the National Mall alone, more than a dozen beckon. Yet one of my most memorable visits was to an unassuming museum run by the Daughters of the American Revolution; the exhibition featured vintage wedding dresses and its theme was the evolution of wedding traditions and customs over the past two centuries.
I loved everything about the DAR Museum, just a couple of blocks from the White House. I loved that its scope was manageable and that the exhibition dealt with a single topic, that it was accessible, and that my self-guided visit felt personal and intimate.
We have got it into our heads that we have to see a whole lot when we go to museums - that our experiences there have to be, you know, big. They don't.
With that it mind, I decided to check out five Montreal museums that kind of fly under the radar. They're offthe beaten track and a few are really small. Admission is free or nominal and a couple offer free guided tours; two or three rely on volunteers and have limited hours. But each, in its own way, makes for an enriching experience and, in some
cases, even a profound one.
I challenge anyone to visit the Montreal Holocaust Memorial Centre and not come away moved, even changed. In only a brief visit to the Dorval Museum of Local History and Heritage, I learned something of a community I'd known next to nothing about.
The Musee des Pompiers de Montreal is a fun place, with its antique fire trucks and vintage alarm boxes - and then you find yourself standing before a glass-fronted cabinet holding rows upon row of helmets that belonged to firefighters who lost their lives in the line of duty and something catches in your throat.
The Dorval Museum of Local History and Heritage is on Chemin Bord du Lac, or Lakeshore Drive, in what used to be the coach house of the private Forest and Stream Club next door. The mission of the museum, open since 2002, is to inform the public about the founders of Dorval, some of its more highprofile citizens, and events in its history. Maybe take a few minutes to contemplate the splendid view of Lac St-Louis from one of the benches out back.
There are three exhibition rooms and the impeccably preserved former horse stalls are a big draw for kids. On the upper level, the community's history is presented in a lively timeline spanning more than 300 years. In the large room at the front of the main level, the walls are hung with portraits and brief descriptions of prominent residents. Among them are Anne Savage, an artist with the Beaver Hall group and an art educator; Frances Oneson, one of Canada's first female air traffic controllers; and Henry (Harry) Markland Molson, a onetime Dorval mayor who was owner of the Molson Bank at the time of his death in the sinking of the Titanic in 1912.
Among the museum's features are memorabilia and trivia from domains including business, culture and places of worship. Longtime Montrealers will recognize the wooden box on which copies of The Montreal Star once sat at newsstands, for instance, and there is a framed sample of Dorval's own tartan, courtesy of the Dorval Weavers' Guild. 1850 Chemin Bord du Lac, Dorval.
Open Thursday through Sunday, 1 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., with volunteer docents on hand to answer questions. Free admission. 514-633-4314.
The Ecomusee du fier monde, in Montreal's Centre-Sud neighbourhood, provides a window onto the area's industrial history: In the late 19th century through to the middle of the 20th century, Montreal was an industrial and commercial centre and the people who worked in the factories in Centre-Sud also lived in Centre-Sud. They bowled with their friends from work and they met their wives at work, as Ecomusee director Rene Binette explained.
The museum is housed in a former public bath on Amherst St., opened in 1927: The majority of residents of working-class neighbourhoods in the early 20th century had no baths or showers. It's a commanding space with vaulted ceilings, designed in the Art Deco style. The facility had a recreational function as well: It was once the busiest pool in Montreal, Binette said, used for activities such as water polo and synchronized swimming.
The pool closed in 1992, although the original ceramic tile of the pool walls is still visible, and the building was turned over to the Ecomusee, with a mandate to be a museum of industrial history. The permanent exhibition traces the impact of industry on the families who worked in the factories - to make ends meet, often the entire family, including children, had to work - and it includes household objects of the era as well as testimonies from residents.
From the 1950s through the 1970s, as the factories closed and people moved away, the area lost its industrial character. Photographer, visual artist and composer Daniel Heikalo, born in 1954, lived in Centre-Sud for 25 years and his fine and stirring series of photographs of what was essentially a disappearing world makes up the museum's excellent temporary exhibition. Regard inedit sur mon quartier, which features photographs set mostly in the 1970s and largely in black and white, runs to Aug. 28.
Part of the Ecomusee's mandate is to encourage community participation and projects include a literacy group. The space today is used for book launches, cocktail receptions, movie shoots - and even weddings and funerals. 2050 Amherst St.
[broken bar][broken bar]Open Wednesday through Sunday. $8 for adults; $6 for students, seniors and children over 6; $16 family admission. 514-528-8444.
There's something about seeing things with your own eyes, said Alice Herscovitch, director of the Montreal Holocaust Memorial Centre. Like the 1938 notice on view in a glass case at the Cote-des-Neiges museum that says, "Jews are not wanted here in Ste-Agathe, so scram while the going is good."
The mission of the museum, established in 1979 by a group of Holocaust survivors with support from members of the Jewish community and Federation CJA, is to educate people about the Holocaust, whatever their age or background, and to sensitize them to the perils of anti-Semitism, racism, indifference and prejudice.
"When people come to the museum, I think they are often shocked that they are not in a museum of horror," said Herscovitch. Certainly there is tragedy and incredible sadness in the exhibits. But there is much more than that, including stories of resistance and survival.
"I think people come out reflecting, making comparisons to contemporary society," she said. "They often come away with great inspiration ... asking themselves, in today's world, where atrocity continues, what must we do?" Often people are surprised to learn of Canada's inaction in the face of what was happening to Jews in Europe during the Second World War. "People see Canada as a great human-rights intervener," Herscovitch said, but as is shown through correspondence and more on display at the museum, "only 70 years ago ... a very different set of values" was at work. Between 1939 and 1944, only 4,000 Jews were admitted to Canada - 6.5 per cent of the total number of immigrants.
Among visitors each year to the museum are about 10,000 young people on school visits; about 1,800 more students visit individually. When I was there one recent afternoon, several American and European tourists were there. Still, "in terms of individual visitors, we have space for more," said Herscovitch.
There are still opportunities, if diminishing, to hear Holocaust survivors give testimony. Among other venues, they speak to visitors during open houses at the museum: The next ones will be Sept. 17, Nov. 20 and Dec. 11.
The museum itself features interactive screens and other experiential elements. This year museology students at the Universite du Quebec a Montreal prepared three powerful videos on some of the objects in the collection. And an app featuring three tours of its permanent exhibition can be downloaded free on iPads and Android devices. 5151 Cote-Ste-Catherine Rd. near Westbury Ave.
[broken bar][broken bar] Open daily except Saturday and Jewish holidays. Admission: $8 for adults, $5 for students, seniors and children. Free guided tours for groups by reservation only. 514-345-2605.
Can't really have a Canadian museum exhibition about space that doesn't mention William Shatner, a.k.a. Captain James T. Kirk, or astronaut Chris Hadfield, the first Canadian to float freely in space - and the current exhibition at the Musee des Ondes Emile Berliner in St-Henri, a history of Montreal's involvement in space exploration, mentions both.
Emile Berliner was a pioneer in the record and gramophone industry and the museum, open since 1992, has featured one exhibition each year; topics have included radio and the early years of jazz. What were once Berliner's gramophone facilities eventually became the home of RCA Victor Canada in St-Henri. As the exhibit shows, the company got involved in the development and production of high-tech products including microwave radio relay systems, communication satellites and television broadcast equipment. "The 20th century was all about transformation," said museum director Michel Forest.
RCA Victor produced radios for planes and tanks in the Second World War and went from what was essentially an entertainment company to a high-tech company in the space of six years, he explained. With the onset of the
Cold War, early warning radar detection stations were developed across Canada, including the Distant Early Warning line in the Far North. The space race came next: The Russians were first in space with the Sputnik in 1957, the Americans second in 1958 with Explorer 1: Canada was the third country, with the Alouette 1 satellite in 1962 - and RCA had begun its foray into the aerospace industry.
"I don't think Montrealers understand how important this little space was in the history of the century," said Forest. Satellite components, models of satellites and screens with printed information make for a thorough self-guided visit and there is someone on hand to answer questions. 1001 Lenoir St., Rm E-206.
[broken bar][broken bar] Open to all from 2 to 5 p.m. Friday to Sunday, Wednesdays by appointment only. Suggested donation: $5.
When an organization of auxiliary firefighters established itself in Montreal back in 1944, one of their functions was to operate a canteen that served refreshments to firefighters battling big blazes. They still do that. "It's a way of giving back to the firefighters," said Steve Garnett, who has been president of the organization of 26 auxiliary firefighters and director of its Musee des Pompiers de Montreal since 2004. The auxiliary firefighters, all volunteers, get about 250 calls a year, although not all are to fires: They also attend parades, such as the Santa Claus and the St-Patrick's Day events.
The museum has been on St-Laurent Blvd. at Laurier Ave. since 1980 in a building that was once a combined police and fire station; the police station closed in 1979.
The museum space, which occupies two floors, was renovated in 2005-2006, and there is a good deal to see. The museum has 22 antique fire trucks, although there isn't space for all of them at the museum. There are, however, several vehicles on display, including old ones pulled by hand and hose wagons with steam engines that were pulled by two or four horses.
There are old red fire buckets, with rounded bottoms (so no one would pinch them to use for purposes other than firefighting, Garnett said) and old leather fire hoses. There are old fire photos, vintage uniforms and red alarm boxes, like the ones that were a common sight on Montreal street corners until the early 1980s, and the volunteers leading the tours explain how they worked. 5151 St-Laurent Blvd. at Laurier Ave.
[broken bar][broken bar]Open Sundays, 1:30 to 4 p.m. Free admission, with donations appreciated. 514-872-3757.
sschwartz@postmedia.com Twitter.com/susanschwartz
Credit: SUSAN SCHWARTZ; The Gazette
Illustration PHIL CARPENTER / Pierre Valiquette of the Musee des Ondes Emile Berliner in St-Henri looks at the RCA Victor mascot, Nipper. The museum explains the history of Emile Berliner, who was a pioneer in the record and gramophone industry, whose factory eventually became the headquarters of RCA Victor in Canada, which developed equipment for the aerospace industry.; MICHEL PINAULT / The Dorval Museum of Local History and Heritage informs visitors about the founders of Dorval and the events in its history. The second level, above, presents a timeline spanning more than 300 years.; COURTESY ECOMUSEE DU FIER MONDE / The Ecomusee du fier monde in Montreal's Centre-Sud neighbourhood looks at the area's industrial history from the late 19th- to mid-20th century. It's located in a former public bathhouse opened in 1927 that was built in the Art Deco style for neighbourhood residents who often had no baths or showers at home.; PIERRE OBENDRAUF / A moving sight at the Musee des Pompiers de Montreal is the helmets of the firefighters killed in the line of duty. The museum has 22 antique fire trucks, not all on display, and many other artifacts.; COURTESY OF ALEX DWORKIN CANADIAN JEWISH ARCHIVES / Anti-Semitic sign from Ste-Agathe, circa 1938, displayed at the Montreal Holocaust Memorial Museum.; PHIL CARPENTER / Romain Bonnifet walks by a model of the International Space Station at the Musee des Ondes Emile Berliner in St-Henri, which explains RCA's role in developing satellite, radar and other aerospace technology.

