On March 25 the City of Montreal issued a press release heralding an agreement with Hydro-Quebec to maintain the biodiversity of plants and animals on servitudes owned by the utility on green spaces on the island.
The agreement, signed on March 24, specifically mentions parks in the Anjou and Ahuntsic-Cartierville boroughs.
On March 25, resident Denis Lemieux, who lives next to the entrance of the Bois-de-Liesse nature park in Pierrefonds-Roxboro, got a hand delivered note explaining that trees in the adjacent park would be cut down the following day.
On March 26 and 27, crews contracted by Hydro went to the Bois-de-Liesse park and cut down approximately 70 mature trees. The 159-hectare park stretches from Dollard-des-Ormeaux in the west, through parts of Pierrefonds-Roxboro and Ahuntsic-Cartierville Lemieux was at the park at 9 a.m. last Thursday to meet with the Hydro crews.
Lemieux said when he asked the Hydro spokesperson about the rush job, he was told that the tree cutting had been worked out with the borough "10 to 12 days earlier."
The agreement signed late last month mentions maintaining the forest canopy, the importance of preserving biodiversity. Nowhere does it mention trimming trees close to hydro lines rather than just chopping them down.
Sylvia Oljemark, a spokesperson for the Green Coalition, said the city has "dropped the ball and sold us out."
"Back in June, Montreal Mayor Denis Coderre promised no more mature trees would be cut," Oljemark said.
"The entente is a mistake because it doesn't mention trimming. All cutting should stop unless the tree is dead. Trimming should be the way to go," she added.
This, according to Lemieux, is not Hydro's modus operandi.
Lemieux had been told by a Hydro spokesperson that all trees marked with blue paint would be cut. He asked why the branches could not be trimmed and the tree saved.
"Hydro does not trim trees. We clean," was the response he was given, he says.
Hydro-Quebec spokesperson Jean-Philippe Rousseau said that the high-tension lines supported by pylons running through the Bois-de-Liesse park carry 315,000 volts. Trees are cut and trimmed to ensure public safety and prevent power outages.
Electricity can arc from a line to a tree causing injury to bystanders and even fire, he said.
"We categorize trees in three groups: immediate risk, shortterm risk and medium-term risk," Rousseau said.
"The trees in Bois-de-Liesse park are short-term risk and could not wait for another year's growth. These trees were moving into the safety clearing zone."
"We've been working on this for two-and-a-half years, meeting with local politicians," Lemieux said.
"I am very upset at the way the city let us down on this project, after all the work we have done," he said. "They don't care. They are the government. They are there to protect the woods, and they let Hydro-Quebec do what they want."
"Hydro does not do this job for fun, we know this is a sensitive issue," Rousseau said.
"We do prune trees, but under high voltage wires, pruning does not allow us to control the risk." asutherland@montrealgazette.com
Credit: ANNE SUTHERLAND; The Gazette
Illustration FREDERIC HORE, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Denis Lemieux surveys trees cut down last week by Hydro-Quebec in the Bois-de-Liesse nature park.

