Sorry, kids: it's back to school on Wednesday.
After a surprise day off Tuesday due to freezing rain, school boards said they expect children to stream back to school.
At the Commission scolaire de Montréal, the province's biggest board, all schools will be open, spokesperson Alain Perron said. At the English Montreal School Board, spokesperson Mike Cohen said: "There is no weather forecast to indicate we will have to cancel a second day."
Montreal woke up Tuesday to a city covered in a coat of ice and a weather forecast that included a freezing rain warning over the course of the day.
As of Tuesday afternoon, Urgences Santé had responded to about 25 calls after pedestrians had fallen on icy sidewalks, said spokesperson Valérie Tremblay.
All Montreal-area school boards closed their schools and offices. That decision was made after the director generals held a conference call early Tuesday morning.
But the EMSB had decided independently to close its schools and adult centres after listening to the forecast.
At 5 a.m. Tuesday, Cohen sent out a recorded telephone message to more than 30,000 students and employees notifying them of the school closures. He also sent out a mass email and posted the news on Facebook and Twitter.
"It was the first time we did a call out to every single home to tell them that school has been closed," Cohen said.
City spokesperson Philippe Sabourin acknowledged many sidewalks on secondary streets remained covered in snow and ice early Tuesday, but added their condition was part of the city's plan to deal with the cocktail of weather conditions that prevailed between Monday night and Tuesday morning.
"We adopted a 'Scott towel'approach," he said. "Rather than plow away the snow that fell on Monday night, we left it there to absorb the freezing rain we knew was going to fall afterward."
Sabourin said sidewalk plows equipped with abrasive spreaders were deployed Tuesday morning to remove the snow and its shell of ice and scatter a mix of salt and grit.
"If we had cleared the snow immediately, the ice would have been far more difficult to remove once the temperature dropped (on Tuesday night)," he said.
While main thoroughfares in Montreal were plowed overnight, the ensuing freezing rain rendered road surfaces treacherous.
As of 6:30 p.m., just over 21,000 Hydro-Québec customers were without power, including 12,000 in the Montérégie region and 7,800 in Montreal. The main cause of blackouts were tree branches falling on power lines, said Hydro-Québec spokesperson Françis Labbé.
At Trudeau airport, scores of flights were cancelled or delayed. Presse Canadienne and The Canadian Press contributed to this report.
CREDIT: KATHERINE WILTON;The Gazette

