Montreal's Greek community is reeling from news that wildfires in Greece have taken at least 79 lives outside the nation's capital.
"It's devastating to think that so many people are losing their lives and their loved ones in this fire," said Andy Crilis, vice president of the Hellenic Community of Greater Montreal.
"And then you think of the people who don't know if their loved ones are OK or not. It breaks your heart."
Crilis said he hasn't heard of any Montrealers stuck in the fires raging in the seaside villages of Rafina, Mati and areas outside Athens. There are no reports of Canadian casualties in the fires.
"With our community being as big as it is, there are probably people in Montreal with family that's affected by this," said Crilis. "But it's all so fresh, we're only now beginning to realize the magnitude of it."
Joanna Chery, who owns Phyllo Bar Mélina on Parc Ave., got married near the port of Rafina last weekend. According to one of her employees, she made it out of the area before it was engulfed in flames.
"Our friends and family are safe but hundreds of people are not," she wrote in a post on Facebook.
"Our deepest condolences go to the people of Mati, Rafina and Kineta whose lives were lost in this senseless tragedy."
Meanwhile, in Montreal, Crilis says a dozen volunteers are working the phones to collect donations for the victims of Greece's wildfires.
"They're calling family, friends, business owners," said Crilis. "We're a tight-knit community and we come together in times like these."
The connection between Montreal's 85,000-strong Greek community and their homeland is hard to describe, according to Crilis.
His family came to Montreal from southern Greece in the 1960s. They couldn't speak French or English but both got work as labourers and managed to give their children a better life.
Despite their success in the new country, they instilled a sense of pride of their Greek heritage in their children and grandchildren - who all speak Greek fluently.
"We go back and visit family as often as we can," Crilis said. "We're very connected to our roots just like everyone in the community."
The community will likely organize a fundraising event in the coming weeks. In the meantime, Crilis is asking people who want to donate to call 514-738-2421.
Donors can also visit hcgm.org of the HCGM Facebook page for more information on how to help fundraising efforts.
CREDIT: Postmedia News

