Then the cold returned.
Montrealers will wake up to an ice-covered city on Friday after a tumultuous week of weather that has seen about 45 centimetres of snow, see-sawing temperatures, as well as freezing rain and plain rain.
After temperatures rose to 3 C Thursday, Environment Canada says the mercury will drop to -6 C by 6 a.m. Friday, with a wind chill of -17 C, a chance of flurries and gusty winds.
Expect the giant puddles left behind by Thursday's rain and the snow that melted in above-freezing temperatures to turn into giant rinks, making driving and walking difficult.
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante is appealing for patience.
"We know this has been difficult for Montrealers," she said Thursday afternoon. "Snow removal is continuing. We received 30 centimetres on Sunday, crews started working on Monday at 7 p.m. and we're almost at 60 per cent completion."
But she said "the rains have slowed down the snow-removal operation because we've had to re-allocate resources to make sure roads and sidewalks can be used, and the challenge is that we're in a race against the clock because we know it will get colder. Right now it's mild, but (Thursday night) it's going to go down to minus-10 and that water will freeze."
The mayor said a small fleet of icebreaking plows designed to clear sidewalks had begun to be deployed and would probably see more work Friday as the temperature fell even further.
As for the ongoing snow-removal operation, originally expected to end by Friday, it will now only finish sometime next week, Plante said.
City officials are blaming an unexpected surplus of snow for compelling them to juggle resources between clearing away the slush and ice that clogged sewers in many parts of the city and removing snow banks formed Sunday.
City spokesperson Philippe Sabourin said about 15 centimetres of snow ended up falling Wednesday, more than double what had been predicted.
"It was a tempest for our (snow removal) crews. It wasn't on the radar for the city of Montreal or the meteorologists."
Thursday was Day 5 of a nightmarish weather cocktail that saw a sub-zero snowstorm on Sunday followed on Wednesday by a day of snow and freezing rain and then steady rain beginning early Thursday that turned all of the above into ice-sheeted streets and sidewalks with intersections resembling small ponds.
Weather-related crashes were reported across the region. Local road conditions ranged from dodgy to downright treacherous. Water accumulation was the major challenge for motorists, with vehicles of any size running the risk of hydroplaning if they suddenly hit water patches at high speed.
All Montreal island school boards cancelled classes. Power outages were reported in some parts of Montreal and Quebec. Dozens of flights were delayed or cancelled at Trudeau International Airport. And local hospitals reported ice-related injuries.
Inundated with calls, Urgences Santé urged Montrealers to contact 911 "only if a life (was) in danger." The ambulance service "had many calls involving people falling on the sidewalks, car accidents, but no major injuries," said supervisor Valérie Tremblay.
Surface public transit on Montreal island also suffered. The Société de transport de Montréal said bus service was delayed and warned buses might not be able to deploy their ramps allowing wheelchair access because of the accumulation of snow on sidewalks.
After a week of atmospheric turmoil, Mother Nature will provide a reprieve on Saturday: the forecast calls for a sunny day and a high of -12 C.
CREDIT: Postmedia News

