The city of Montreal does not have enough machinery and manpower to clear its snow and spread abrasives on its sidewalks at the same time. So in times of crises, it must prioritize.
In the case of the snow and ice storm that hit Montreal starting Jan. 3, most boroughs chose the wrong priority, opting to clear the snow before putting down salt or gravel on sidewalks.
This was the main cause of the city's failings determined by an internal audit of the snow-clearing operations presented Wednesday. The report was compiled by the office of city comptroller Alain Bond through telephone interviews with the heads of public works of all 19 of the city's boroughs at the request of Mayor Denis Coderre. Bond's report said poor weather forecasts, machinery that was either broken down or couldn't handle slippery sidewalks, and poor communication with its boroughs and citizens exacerbated the problems. In retrospect, many boroughs admitted they wished they had stopped their snow-clearing operations to concentrate on making their sidewalks safer.
Vowing last week to find out "who did not do their jobs" leading to more than 3,000 calls to the city's help hotline, Coderre toned down his message Wednesday, saying he was merely trying to determine causes and find solutions.
Coderre vowed to put in place the 16 recommendations from the report, which include establishing a standard level of service to be followed by all boroughs, improved communications, better training of workers and creating a pool of employees and equipment that can be shared among boroughs in times of need.
"It's clear it was a series of small failings that explained this situation," he said. "I think it is clear that today those recommendations will be applied. We will create a new snow-clearing policy. ... We can't have 19 different policies for 19 boroughs."
He added that the issue was not one of money or budgets, as opposition parties have suggested, but of better management.
Opposition party Projet Montreal scoffed at Coderre's assertion money wasn't the issue, saying Coderre's cutting of boroughs' snow budgets by seven per cent was in part to blame for the lack of human resources and equipment.
"Mr. Coderre said last week he was embarking on a witch hunt to find out who was responsible. Today, we see the guilty party is M. Coderre," Projet Montreal leader Luc Ferrandez said. A lack of communication from the central city, employee absenteeism in several boroughs and poor weather forecasts created a "general chaos" during which Coderre abdicated his role as leader, Ferrandez said.
The comptroller found: Weather reports paid for by the city predicted the coming snow and freezing rain, but failed to predict plummeting temperatures to follow. Because of that, many boroughs decided to finish clearing the snow before switching to sanding sidewalks. (A presentation by the city's civil servants last week, however, said that the weather forecasts they surveyed were very accurate.)
Boroughs are mostly unable to carry out snow clearing and spreading abrasives at the same time.
Many borough decision makers felt pressed to move to snow-clearing mode as soon as possible.
The effectiveness of the spreading of abrasives differs widely from borough to borough, and even within the same borough depending on whether it's handled by city workers or private contractors. In one borough, private contractors were able to complete salting in five hours, while blue collars required nine hours.
In many boroughs, sidewalk abrasive spreaders were deemed dangerous because their rubber tires caused them to slide offsidewalks and couldn't handle steep hills.
Employee absenteeism was not an issue in most boroughs, except Ahuntsic-Cartierville and the Sud-Ouest borough.
In Ile-Bizard-Ste-Genevieve, roughly 50 per cent of equipment was broken. Some boroughs lacked mechanics to fix broken machinery.
Coderre's assertion the city can impose similar norms on each borough for snow clearing shows he has a complete lack of understanding of snow-clearing operations, Projet Montreal councillor Guillaume Lavoie charged. All boroughs have different needs based on density, parking, kilometres of roads and sidewalks, and cannot fit into one standard.
Michel Parent, head of the city's blue-collar union responsible for snow clearing, said boroughs used to share resources and manpower, until they were forced to merge. Now boroughs are hesitant to share equipment for fear it will break and they will be saddled with the cost.
Ferrandez said boroughs employees are worked to the limit during snowstorms, and have no excess time to share with other boroughs.
Credit: RENE BRUEMMER; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The focus by some boroughs on snow removal instead of spreading abrasives during this month's ice storm is a major reason sidewalks became skating rinks, says a report issued on Wednesday. The report also made 16 recommendations to help improve the process.; PHIL CARPENTER, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Crews clear snow on Deguire Blvd. in St-Laurent on Tuesday.

