Geneviève Polese has lived in Montreal her whole life, but every time there's a large snowfall she sees it through the eyes of a newcomer.
Polese is a project coordinator at Bienvenue à N.D.G., a welcome centre for new immigrants. The immigrants she works with always marvel at the snow the first time they experience a major storm, she said.
"The first thing is amazement that something is falling from the sky and it's just staying around," Polese said. "The second question is what to do with it. Where does it go? It's not rain, it's not mud. How do people function?" Veteran Montrealers were perhaps not as happy to see the extra surprise snow that greeted them Monday morning. About 15 centimetres fell in the early hours of the day, creating havoc on roads and sidewalks. The STM's bus network was significantly delayed and traffic chaos was in evidence on local roads and highways, making for a rougher-than-normal morning commute.
"It was a surprise for us," city spokesperson Philippe Sabourin said. "We were expecting five centimetres, but we got three times that amount."
He said the city's crews were hampered because some were already out loading snow from Friday's storm and others were on break after working their maximum of 70 hours, which didn't leave many to plow and salt roads and sidewalks.
"The other problem was that the most intense snow came during rush hour and, of course, our crews got caught in traffic just like everyone else," Sabourin said.
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante acknowledged that the unexpectedly heavy snowfall could slow snow-clearing operations.
"It was going very well," she said with a laugh. "Obviously, we will remove it."
Sabourin said the snow-clearing operation that was forecast to end Friday will now probably last until the beginning of next week, because crews have to return to the streets where snow was already removed. He urged Montrealers to be patient with city crews, to respect no-parking signs and not to park in such a way as to block emergency vehicles.
The city's snow-clearing website (montreal.ca/deneigement) lists areas where people can park for free overnight during a snow-clearing operation.
Environment Canada meteorologist Simon Legault said the snowfall Monday morning defied predictions, as the system intensified quickly overnight. He said a weather warning was issued, but it came late because 15 centimetres is the minimum amount needed to trigger a warning.
Polese said immigrants are often surprised that people continue to go about their daily lives during snowstorms.
"We get a lot of calls from people saying, 'I'm not going to come in for the French class because it's snowing,'but we still function."
Walking around N.D.G., Tunisian immigrant Latifa Haouesh said she was impressed with how well the city continues to run after a major snowfall.
"Public transit continues, and schools are still running," said Haouesh, who moved to Montreal with her family about a year ago. "The city continues to run. It's very well organized."
Haouesh said she wasn't sure about winter when she moved last year, but now she takes it all in stride.
"When we came last year, we just caught the end of winter and it was very icy. It was terrible," she said. "When it's like this and there's no ice, it's perfect. It's amazing.
"This is, 'Wow!'This is impressive."
Legault said more snow is expected on Thursday, with up to 10 centimetres falling in the afternoon and overnight. The weekend is expected to be frigid, with a low of -20 C on Saturday morning. Marian Scott of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder Facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist

