In accepting congratulations this week for Arrival's extraordinary eight Academy Award nominations, director Denis Villeneuve was quick to share credit. "First of all, I exist as a filmmaker because I was formed by the Quebecois scene," he said.
Indeed, as Villeneuve noted in listing off several other much-honoured Quebec filmmakers (not least Xavier Dolan), this province has quite consciously provided an environment that, in Villeneuve's words, "encourages directors to create an original vision without worrying about box office."
Some might sneer that box office is exactly what filmmakers should be worrying about. (If a sublime art film falls in the forest ... ) But, as Villeneuve's own films have demonstrated, audiences can indeed be engaged by movies that are the product of a fresh, authentic vision - where there is no need for formulaic car chases because there is far more action inside the characters' heads.
A thought-provoking story about efforts to communicate with space aliens who land on Earth, Arrival is free of the usual cliches. Audiences have flocked to see it. And now, the film has been nominated for best picture and Villeneuve for best director.
There are also six other nominations, in less glamorous categories like sound mixing, that should not be overlooked. Several also went to Quebecers, which testifies to the depth of talent here. The film was shot in Quebec - in Montreal and near Rimouski - with a largely Canadian crew, and the special effects were also done here, all providing a significant economic boost.
Also not to be overlooked is another Quebec Oscar nominee: Theodore Ushev of the federal National Film Board, for his animated short Blind Vaysha.
Since the Quiet Revolution, Quebec has prioritized culture in a conscious effort to give expression to this province's distinct identity, lest it be overwhelmed by the rest of the continent. Similar concerns gave rise to Canadian content policies and other forms of federal support for artists.
The Quebec cultural scene is flourishing, thanks in part to the staunch financial support for the arts on the part of the government as well as to a cultural infrastructure that celebrates artistic achievement via events such as the ADISQ and Iris awards. It is not just Denis Villeneuve who is a product of the Quebecois scene. Global success stories like Cirque du Soleil and Arcade Fire, and even Celine Dion, have their roots in the uniquely supportive environment for the arts that exists in this province.
As Heritage Minister Melanie Joly reviews Canada's cultural policy - aiming to update it for the digital age - that is something Canadians would do well to ponder.
Credit: The Gazette

