(From Montreal Gazette, January 29, 2015) Due to a reporting error, a column in Wednesday's Montreal Gazette referred to an electronic road sign in Massachusetts that purportedly read "Wicked Big Storm Coming. Pahk Ya Cah!" That sign, which was widely circulated on social media, turned out to have been Photoshopped. The Gazette regrets the error. *****
Damned if you do, double damned if you don't.
Predicting a storm of "historic" proportions, New York City Mayor Bill De Blasio called on residents Monday to go home and batten down the hatches. Broadway theatres cancelled performances, planes were grounded, the subway shut down early and schools and the Metropolitan Museum were closed Tuesday.
Hours before the nor'easter dubbed Snowmageddon was expected to barrel up the East Coast, five states had declared a state of emergency.
What the Big Apple got, as we know now, was bupkus. A storm of Vaudevillian legend, Juno may be best remembered there for snowball fights in a deserted Times Square, overwrought correspondents reporting from CNN's blizzardmobile and Manhattan survivalists jostling for baguettes and batteries at the Whole Foods emporium.
The storm did sock it to Cape Cod and Boston, where Massachusetts used electronic road signs and a sense of humour to caution motorists to travel with care: "Wicked Big Storm Coming. Pahk Ya Cah!" To be honest, it seems like a pretty good day when the news du jour focuses on a snowstorm of anticlimactic proportions.
So were the politicians wrong to be prepared, to heed the warnings of the National Weather Service and scare the populace into submission?
It is instructive to contrast their hyper-readiness with Montreal's dismal handling of snow clearing this winter.
Montreal has a well-worn reputation for knowing its way around a snowstorm. We have the experience, the crews, the equipment. Visitors from distant lands who happen to be here after a storm stare out the windows in wonder as the armada of trucks, plows and blowers performs a late night snow-clearing ballet.
But this season, we have allowed petty politics and contractual squabbles to intrude on what ought to be a simple and obvious task - to ensure that the roads are cleared and the sidewalks are safe for pedestrians.
Despite the fact that Montreal got pretty much exactly the storm Environment Canada had predicted - a dirty cocktail of rain, freezing rain, ice pellets and snow, complicated by a sudden deep freeze - snow clearing and removal was woebegone and belaboured in many districts.
Mayor Denis Coderre huffed and puffed and promised to find out who wasn't doing their job.
Projet Montreal accused the mayor of launching "a witch hunt."
An internal audit detailed a cavalcade of system failures - broken machinery, understaffed work crews, elementary miscalculations on whether to salt, sand or clear snow, and in what order.
Luc Ferrandez, Projet's leader and the mayor of Plateau-Mont-Royal, initially said his district couldn't afford to clear the streets, blaming the central city for cutting $800,000 from its snow budget.
Only on Monday, some three weeks after the rain began to fall on Jan. 3, did the Plateau finally relent, admitting it had erred and announcing it would begin to remove snow from one-third of its streets.
As for the other two-thirds of streets in the city's trendiest district, well, good luck with that, and don't forget to stock up on rock salt. Spring is 53 days away.
Canadians with long memories can still get a cheap laugh out of the time Toronto mayor Mel Lastman summoned the army - 400 troops dispatched from CFB Petawawa, driving armoured vehicles - when the city was pummelled with 118 centimetres of snow in January 1999. The soldiers had help from a brigade of 100 volunteer shovellers from Prince Edward Island, who were rewarded with tickets to a Maple Leafs game. (No, I did not make that up.)
Yet for all his over-the-top outlandishness, Lastman understood what he was there for, what was required of politicians, and expected by taxpayers. "We arranged it so that seniors could go around the corner to get milk," he told the Toronto Star a decade later. "Would I do it again? You're darned right I would."
In the wake of Monday's storm-that-wasn't, New York's governor, Andrew Cuomo, was asked whether he felt authorities had over-reacted. "We have had people die in storms," Cuomo told reporters. "I would rather be in a situation where we said, 'We got lucky.'" Of course, it takes more than the dusting of snow that blanketed Central Park to stop Montrealers, who party through the bleak mid-winter, cycling through slush and motoring through potholes the size of groundhogs wearing Canada Goose parkas.
But even hardy winter souls have a right to basic services from their city administration, starting with safe, ice-free, sidewalks and a place to pahk the cah.
pcurran@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/peggylcurran
Credit: PEGGY CURRAN; The Gazette
Illustration JOHN KENNEY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / The hyper-readiness in the U.S. for Monday's winter storm contrasts Montreal's dismal handling of snow clearing this winter. An internal audit has detailed a cavalcade of system failures.

