Montreal's comptroller's office investigated how the city responded to the first major snow and ice storm of 2015.
Here's a timeline of the storm and the city's response, compiled from city comptroller Alain Bond's report and media reports.
DEC. 31 The city's public-works department, using information from three weather services, sends out its daily weather forecasting bulletin. The Dec. 31 bulletin mentions rain and ice conditions. Bond's report says those daily bulletins were updated, but forecast temperatures around 10 C and did not foresee the dramatic drop in temperature that would occur between Jan. 4 and 5.
JAN. 1 10 a.m. Snow began falling.
JAN. 3 Boroughs began spreading abrasives.
JAN. 4 Between Jan. 3 and 4, about 23 centimetres of snow fell in Montreal.
Freezing rain began. In total, about 20 mm of freezing rain fell.
The city's daily weather-forecasting report issued Jan. 3 predicted that by 4 p.m. Jan. 4, the temperature would be around 8 and there would be no precipitation. In fact, the temperature went from -9.8 C to 2.1 C on Jan. 4 and eventually fell to -17 C by Jan. 5. Eight of the city's 19 boroughs began snow-clearing operations. The other 11 boroughs began snow clearing the next day.
JAN. 5 Hospitals report higher-thanusual numbers of people with broken wrists and ankles, and Urgences Sante said it was transporting more people than usual to hospitals because they had fallen on icy sidewalks, driveways, entranceways and parking lots.
6:48 p.m. On Twitter, Mayor Denis Coderre says that he has asked for widespread use of abrasives, and says it could slow snow-clearing operations.
8 p.m. After receiving a high number of complaints and given the city administration's concern about the situation, Montreal's borough-co-ordination office sent a notice to all boroughs to begin spreading abrasives as quickly as possible, before the next morning, Bond's report said.
JAN. 6 The city of Montreal defended the treacherous condition of its sidewalks, saying an exceptional cocktail of snow, rain, freezing rain and plummeting temperatures played havoc with its snow-clearing and salting operations.
"It's the worst (weather) conditions that you could bring together and it hampered our ability to get ahead," said Philippe Sabourin, a city spokesperson.
JAN. 7 Coderre asks for an audit of the snow-clearing operations.
Credit: The Gazette

