Thanks to La Nina, Montrealers can expect more snow and colder temperatures than last year, experts say. Andy Riga provides your guide to surviving shovelling marathons, icy roads and power failures.
FORECAST After getting off easy last winter, Montrealers should brace themselves for a return to cold, snowy weather, forecasters say.
In case you're out of practice, the Montreal Gazette has put together a shovelling, driving and powerfailure winter survival guide. But first, the forecast. The winter of 2015-16 was milder than usual thanks to the El Nino phenomenon, with less snow, more rain and warmer temperatures.
The one that looms ahead is expected to be marked by La Nina, which normally results in colder weather in Canada.
Between October 2015 and April 2016, 169 centimetres of snow fell on Montreal. If the long-term forecasts are correct and an average amount of snow falls this winter, Montrealers can expect 210 cm - 41 cm more than last year.
"We have the La Nina event going on this year - some coolerthan-normal water down in the equatorial Pacific, off the coast of South America - that's going to be a big driver for us this winter," Weather Network meteorologist Michael Carter said in an interview.
After analyzing historical trends and global weather patterns, he's predicting a return to a traditional chilly, white Montreal winter this year.
"We're returning to more classic winter weather after a very mild winter last year - temperatures that are near normal to perhaps a bit below normal, along with frequent storms and plenty of snow," Carter said.
Environment Canada is also forecasting a whiter, cooler winter for Montreal.
SHOVELLING Shovellers have more to fear than ill-timed city snow plows undoing hours of work.
The combination of physical exertion and cold weather can increase the risk of a heart attack, especially in inactive people and those with heart disease.
"Scooping heavy, wet snow raises your heart rate quickly," the Heart and Stroke Foundation warns. "Add in cold temperatures that raise blood pressure and increase the likelihood of developing blood clots, and it can be deadly."
If you load your shovel with five kilograms of snow every five seconds, you'll have moved almost 1,000 kilograms of snow after 15 minutes. That's hard on the heart and the back.
Here are some shovelling tips from the Heart and Stroke Foundation and the Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety:
Pace yourself. Take frequent breaks and drink warm, nonalcoholic beverages.
Push snow rather than lift it.
If you must throw snow, only pick up as much snow as you can easily lift. Then, rather than twist at the waist, turn your feet toward the direction at which you're aiming.
Avoid overheating; wear thin, breathable layers.
Don't shovel on a full stomach. Digest your meals first; otherwise, shovelling could put an extra strain on your heart.
Stop shovelling if you experience sudden shortness of breath, discomfort in the chest, lightheadedness, nausea, dizziness, or severe headache and immediately seek medical attention.
SHOVELS SHOULD:
Be light (about 1.5 kilograms or three pounds), and sturdy.
Feature a handle that reaches the users's chest to reduce forward bending.
Include a shaft with a bend.
Have the right blade for the job at hand. A large push-style shovel will let you move more snow but may lead you to lift heavy loads. Smaller blades are best for lifting and throwing snow.
MONTREAL SNOW STATISTICS 210 cm Average snowfall (October-April) 169 cm Snowfall (2015-16) 41 cm Additional snow expected this winter compared to last winter (if forecasters are correct) 383.3 cm Most snow in one winter. In 1970-71. That includes 43 cm that fell in one day during the March 1971 "storm of the century" that killed 17 Montrealers.
92.9 cm Least snowfall in one winter (1979-80) Green Christmas: 15 Christmases over the past 60 years have been "green," which Environment Canada defines as having less than 2 cm accumulated snow on the ground on Dec. 25. First snow: The first snowfall (2 cm on the ground) typically happened by Nov. 29 in the years between 1871 and 1910. Between 1971 and 2010, the first snow on the ground was normally recorded on Dec. 12. This year it happened on Nov. 21. Last snow: In the late 1800s, it was normally around April 8 by the time Montreal's last snow had all melted. In the years since 2000, the average snow expiry date had moved up to March 23.
Sources: Environment Canada, The Weather Network, Montreal Gazette Archives DRIVING Before you drive in wintry weather, consider these tips from CAA-Quebec and Transport Canada:
Remove all snow from your vehicle's hood, roof, windows and lights. Clear windows of frost and fog.
Get a tune-up, including an
Slow down on snow and ice. Your tires will have more time to grip the road. Give yourself extra travel time in bad weather.
Avoid using cruise control on slippery roads.
Always turn the steering wheel slowly to retain control.
Front-wheel skids are often you find yourself in a front-wheel skid, gently ease up on the accelerator or brake pedal and steer in the direction of the turn while looking in the direction you want to go.
For rear-wheel skids, turn the front wheels in the direction in which the back end has started swinging, while looking in the direction you want to go.
Be alert for deceptive conditions. Invisible black ice can form when the temperature hovers around zero, especially on bridges, overpasses and underpasses. In rural areas, road conditions can change quickly from dry to snowy or icecovered.
Leave more space than normal time to respond if an emergency arises.
Prepare an emergency kit for your trunk. It should include a shovel, a snow brush, a scraper, traction aids, booster cables, windshield-washer fluid, a reflective vest, a battery-free flashlight, basic tools, a first-aid kit, a warm blanket and some non-perishable snacks.
HOME EMERGENCY KIT Authorities suggest you prepare a home kit with basic supplies that can help you take care of yourself and your family for 72 hours in case of an emergency such as an extended power failure.
Heavy snow and freezing rain can take down power lines, though Hydro-Quebec says power outages are more common in the summer.
WHAT SHOULD YOUR EMERGENCY KIT INCLUDE? Here are some basic supplies suggested by Public Safety Canada, Hydro-Quebec and Quebec's public-security department.
Water (at least two litres of water per person per day).
Food that won't spoil, such as canned and dried food, energy bars.
Manual can opener.
Crank or battery-powered flashlight
Warm blankets.
Battery-powered radio (and extra batteries) to monitor the situation.
First aid kit (bandages, gauze sterile pads, scissors, tweezers, safety pins, antiseptic, pain medication).
Other items such as prescription medication, infant formula and equipment for people with disabilities. ariga@postmedia.com
Credit: ANDY RIGA; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA / The city of Montreal launched its first major snow-removal operation of the season on Tuesday.; PIERRE OBENDRAUF, FILES / Shovelling can be bad for your back - and your heart.; WM. NOTMAN AND SON, MCCORD MUSEUM / ; MONTREAL STAR / ; CITY OF MONTREAL ARCHIVES / Clearing snow with the help of horse power on Notre-Dame Street, circa 1887. 1971 marked a record year for snow in Montreal. Snow-clearing on Clark Street near de Guizot St. in 1964.; PHIL CARPEN- TER, FILES / Slowing down on snow and ice will give your tires more time to grip the road.; PETER MARTIN, FILES / Hydro-Quebec says snow, freezing rain and wind are the main causes of power failures.

