On his latest disc, 43.0 - Warning: May Contain Nuts, Derek Seguin does his fair share of hysterical protesting about dealing with life in his 40s. But the fact remains that since turning 40, the Montreal comic's professional life has turned around dramatically.
After plying his trade for nearly 15 years, Seguin is now getting the respect he deserves, both at home and around the country. He is, without question, one of the most successful and indemand wits in the land - not to mention one of the funniest.
At Toronto's JFL42 in 2015, Seguin took on seven other highly rated standups and won SiriusXM's Top Comic competition for Canada, which came with a $15,000 cash prize as well as a TV spot at the 2016 Just for Laughs fest here and a one-man show at the 2016 edition of JFL42.
A regular on CBC Radio's The Debaters, Seguin has long been a crowd favourite, but his luck really began to change four years ago. That's when he stole the show at a Just for Laughs gala with his mating rituals. In 2014, he brought the house down repeatedly at the fest's Nasty Show series, wherein he vividly recounted the joys of the birthing process.
Half francophone, half Irish anglo, he brings both elements into play with material reflecting his roots, delivered bilingually - but hardly in a politically correct manner.
Seguin officially launches 43.0 this week at his favourite stomping ground, the Comedy Nest, before beginning a tour of Eastern Canada.
"I'm actually 44 now," Seguin says while hanging out at the Nest. "It shows how long it takes to put together an album and get it out there."
This is Seguin's second disc. The title of Newfie Octopus, which came out in 2013, refers to his rollicking romance with his current mate, who does hail from Newfoundland but has only the regulation number of appendages.
Seguin takes it to another gut-splitting level on 43.0. He does some classic ranting about everything from Santa Claus's slave labour force to taking in Disney World with his three kids. He has a field day with allergies to nuts, gluten and eggs. "How can you be allergic to eggs?" he asks his daughter. "You were one seven years ago!" And don't talk to Seguin about school bake sales, given the obstacles posed by the aforementioned allergies and his inability to make a kiwi cake. And don't talk to him about lengthy summer school breaks, either: "I really need my kids to go back to school soon, so I can love them again."
Seguin decided to cut this disc due to popular demand.
"Apparently, some people, if they like the show, like to walk away with a little thing in their hands that they can touch and then listen to," he explains. "This way I can raise a little bit of extra money for myself, and I can share one-third of profits with various charities" - among them, the Gord Downie Fund and AMI-Quebec.
After his Comedy Nest gigs, Seguin takes his act on the road for the first leg of his tour: 10 stops through New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Ontario.
"If I don't lose my shirt and don't end up working at McDonald's or having to sell pressurewashing vinyl-siding equipment as I once did - and not very well, at that - I'll do a second leg through Quebec, other parts of Ontario and Western Canada," he says.
"I'm very, very scared, because I have to pay for everything. Before this, all I had to do was answer my phone, show up to the club, talk ... and go home with money. Now I have to send deposits to theatres, pay designers, print posters, set up websites, do the social media and rent the theatres."
In short, Seguin, with his tour manager, is four-walling this tour - financially underwriting everything from promotion to renting the venues. This has become a common practice among entertainers on this continent. Indeed, Sugar Sammy has followed this formula, and the dividends have been impressive.
"I just pray there won't be any blizzards in Moncton, where only three people - who happen to live in the theatre - show up," Seguin cracks. "But the good news is that I appear to be hitting my stride - just before I retire and get my senior's pension.
"Really, though, I do feel so lucky that comedy is my job and that I can make a living from it, despite the stress related to this tour. I've never worked more, and the paydays have never been as good."
His post-tour dance card is filling fast. He has been booked to do the Halifax and Winnipeg comedy festivals, and JFL will doubtless come calling as well.
Seguin says his self-awareness in dealing with aging, relationships and kids has helped him strike a chord with audiences.
"Now I look in the mirror and I'm shocked: How did I let myself go? What the hell has happened to me? When did this hair grow on my back? There's a lot of gross stuff on my body that I share with audiences, and they are able to relate to it and, most importantly, to laugh at it, too." But age begets wisdom as well. "The reality is that the older I get, the harder I try. Audiences are familiar with my material, so I have to come up with new stuff all the time. I can't phone it in. And I can guarantee if someone were to come see me three days in a row, not (two) of those shows would be the same.
"Five years ago, I was really a nobody. And nobody really cared about my act. As a result, I was very free to do whatever the hell I wanted. But now I have the pressure of my recent past success, and I so desperately want everyone to have even more fun than the last time they saw me. That's really stressful, but that's what this business is all about if you want to stay on top." bbrownstein@postmedia.com twitter.com/billbrownstein
AT A GLANCE
Derek Seguin performs Thursday at 8 p.m. and Friday and Saturday at 8 and 10:30 p.m. at the Comedy Nest, 2313 Ste-Catherine St. W., third floor. Tickets cost $12 ($6 for students) on Thursday; $15 ($10 for students) on Friday; $15 on Saturday. Call 514-932-6378 or visit comedynest.com.
43.0 - Warning: May Contain Nuts costs $20, with one-third of proceeds going to charity. It can be purchased at derekseguin.com, iTunes or Amazon.
Credit: BILL BROWNSTEIN; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Derek Seguin launches his album 43.0 - Warning: May Contain Nuts at the Comedy Nest this week. "I'm actually 44 now," he says. "It shows how long it takes to put together an album and get it out there." After the Comedy Nest shows, Seguin will head out on a 10-stop tour through Eastern Canada.



