Calèche owner Luc Desparois filed an injunction Monday to try to get a Superior Court judge to strike down the city of Montreal's bylaw that will ban horse-drawn carriages in the city as of Jan. 1, 2020.
Desparois, owner of Services des caleches et traineau Lucky Luc, is one of about 15 remaining owners of calèche permits who say the city has unfairly deprived them of their livelihood because of what he considers misplaced concerns about the welfare of the horses.
"Enough with the fake news, enough with the lies," Desparois said in a telephone interview. "We want to be able to work and keep our jobs."
Desparois said he plans to prove in court that the calèche horses are well cared for and suited to the work, through testimony from veterinarians and other experts. He said animal welfare organizations and the mayor of Montreal are simply wrong to say that it is bad for horses to pull carriages in hot weather or in Montreal traffic. He said calèche drivers have been subject to insults and threats by strangers in the streets since the city announced in the summer of 2018 that it would ban the practice.
"Everybody is crying for the horses," he said. "People have to wake up and learn what a horse is, because horses live outside 12 months a year, so 28 degrees is nothing for them. Pulling a carriage in Montreal is nothing for them. We have all the proof and we will be showing it. This is enough. They are crying for horses while people are suffering, and they are crying for nothing."
Only one calèche owner has accepted the city's offer of $1,000 to "retire" former carriage horses once Montreal's calèche ban takes effect on New Year's Eve at midnight.
"We would have liked to have more than one," said Jean-François Parenteau, the executive committee member responsible for carriage horses, at a press conference Monday on the front porch of city hall.
Parenteau said last April that he expected owners of 30 of the approximately 50 remaining calèche horses to take the buyback offer of $1,000 per horse. The horses would be retired to rural settings under a program established in conjunction with Le Refuge de Galahad, a horse-rescue organization.
"We expect to get more requests after Dec. 31," he said Monday.
He added that he also hoped the remaining calèche drivers would take advantage of a program to help them retrain for other tourism jobs, for example, as guides for walking tours.
Parenteau said the calèche industry has declined in recent years because of increased public awareness of animal welfare.
He reacted to the news of the injunction by saying owners have had a full year to prepare for the end of the industry.
The city announced in June 2018 that a municipal bylaw adopted that August would eliminate horse-drawn carriages, once a familiar sight in Old Montreal and on Mount Royal, by the end of 2019.
Last April, it announced the buyback program for former calèche horses after owners warned that horses would end up going to slaughterhouses if banned from city streets. The $1,000 is more than the $500 to $800 that abattoirs pay for a horse, Parenteau said.
On Monday, he said the fact that only one driver has taken the offer shows that calèche owners intend to carry on their business outside of Montreal, for example at sugar shacks, apple orchards and weddings.
Anita Kapuscinska, spokesperson for the Montreal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, said her organization is not worried about the injunction.
"We are confident in the validity of the city's bylaw. We understand that the owners of the horses are waiting to see how that rolls out before potentially contacting us for our program," Kapuscinska said. "It's not surprising that only one horse has so far participated in the program and with the injunction, we understand that the owners of the horses are waiting to see what happens next."
Chamie Cadorette, founder of Le Refuge de Galahad, said the one horse - Sissi - that was adopted through the "retirement" program last month is adapting very well to her new home. She was adopted by two veterinarians who live in the Eastern Townships.
"We are really happy about Sissi because now we know she will have a beautiful end of life and not go to the slaughterhouse," Cadorette said. "After all the years she gave of work, that she is not ending up as steak is important to us. It's a kind of recognition for her."
Incidents like horses collapsing in extreme heat have demonstrated that the calèche industry is inhumane, said city councillor and deputy mayor Sterling Downey, who accompanied Parenteau at the press conference.
"With heat waves in the summer, with climate change, with extreme colds in the winter, with construction on the roads, with the amount of vehicles that are on the road, we have a serious question on the animals'safety," he said.
"People have to understand that these animals don't just work in Montreal," Downey added.
Also starting Jan. 1, all cats and dogs in Montreal will be required to be neutered and microchipped. When it comes time to renew a pet's licence, owners will need to submit proof both procedures have been done, Downey noted. mlalonde@postmedia.com mscott@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MICHELLE LALONDE AND MARIAN SCOTT;The Gazette



