Don't blame God for Montreal's failure to clear its icy streets and sidewalks, Mayor Denis Coderre said Wednesday. The city knew days in advance it was facing a minor snowstorm followed by freezing rain and four days of extreme cold in early January.
That tempete was followed by a storm of accusations as union leaders blamed the city for skimping on overtime payments, borough mayors accused employees of absenteeism and one city councillor blamed global warming.
"The question," Coderre said, "is did we spread abrasives in all the boroughs when they were needed? ... I want to know who didn't do his job."
Opposition party Projet Montreal accused Coderre of responding to a complex issue with petty politics, and of orchestrating a witch hunt to divert attention from the fact his cuts to borough snow-clearing budgets were the main culprit.
Coderre was reacting to a presentation given to the city's executive committee by civil servants on the storm. Here are the city's findings, and reactions:
STORM WAS NO SURPRISE
Forecasts predicted days in advance the city was getting snow Jan. 3 followed by rain and freezing rain, then four days of extreme cold. The forecast 24 hours before the storm was mainly correct, in terms of levels of snow and rain, and when they would fall.
MONTREAL HAS SOME ICE STORM EXPERIENCE
Aside from the big one of 1998, Montreal has been hit with similar conditions - most recently from Dec. 24 to 27, 2008, when the city suffered snow, rain and then freezing rain. Sidewalks ended up in similar shape as this year.
ABRASIVES ARE BEST REMEDY
At temperatures below -21 C, salt becomes ineffective, so abrasives like small rocks are the best solution for frozen streets and sidewalks, officials noted. They must be spread repeatedly because they become encapsulated in layers of ice, until the rain stops.
311 INUNDATED
Montreal's 311 information line received more than 3,000 calls between Monday and Friday of that week complaining of icy roads and sidewalks. The majority of calls came from the boroughs of Ahuntsic-Cartierville, Pierrefonds-Roxboro, Plateau-Mont-Royal, Cote-des-Neiges - Notre-Damede-Grace, St-Laurent, Sud-Ouest and Ville-Marie.
BLAME GAME
Michel Parent, head of the city's blue-collar union, blamed the city for the poor response, saying it didn't want to call in crews on overtime to save money. (City officials denied this.)
Plateau-Mont-Royal mayor and Projet Montreal leader Luc Ferrandez blamed a record level of absenteeism among blue collar workers who were burning off unused sick days allowed in their contract. He and others noted employee ranks were stretched thin by numerous assignments: moving the snow, clearing the snow, spreading abrasives and salt, collecting recycling, repairing water leaks.
Executive committee vice-president Harout Chitilian suggested global warming is presenting new challenges for the city. The city is well prepared for clearing and removing snow, less so for ice storms, and must adjust to changing weather patterns.
OFFICIAL BLAME GAME
The city ordered an audit of the ice-clearing inefficiencies that was supposed to be ready Wednesday.
It wasn't, and the file has been moved to the city's comptroller's office for investigation. That report is supposed to be presented next Wednesday.
Coderre said it was "sad" the city's comptroller was forced to investigate the affair.
"It means there is someone who is not giving the information in his borough somewhere."
WITCH HUNT
Opposition party Projet Montreal accused Coderre of orchestrating a "witch hunt" to try and find a scapegoat.
"It follows the Coderre pattern of taking credit when things go well, but when there is a problem, looking for others to blame," councillor Guillaume Lavoie said. Instead of heeding the suggestions of highranking civil servants to launch a committee to find solutions to a complex problem, Coderre resorted to petty politics, which will do little to resolve future ice issues, Lavoie said.
IMPROVEMENTS
City officials said they were starting a committee to look at best practices in other cities. They noted Quebec City suffered a similar storm last year that rendered most of its bridges impassable. Coderre questioned why a committee was necessary when the city had so much forewarning.
"It's not a question of what product was used, it's a question of operations," he said. "I want to know what happened. The reality is we know someone did not do their job."
rbruemmer@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/renebruemmer
MONTREAL SNOW CLEARING: BY THE NUMBERS
4 Number of days in advance of storm that weather forecasts accurately predicted the snow and freezing rain to come on Jan. 3 and 4
24 Number of centimetres of snow that fell
20 Millimetres of freezing rain that fell
-10to-26C Temperature range in the four days following
-21C Temperature at which salt is no longer efficient
3,083 Number of calls to Montreal's 311 information line to complain of icy sidewalks (1,756) and icy streets (1,327)
126 Largest number of calls from one borough in one day complaining about icy sidewalks, Sud-Ouest borough, Tuesday, Jan. 6
4 Number of calls complaining of icy sidewalks in Pierrefonds-Roxboro on Monday, Jan. 5
6 Number of sidewalk tractor drivers that showed up for duty in Plateau-Mont-Royal, out of a total of 12, in the days following the storm, according to borough mayor and Projet Montreal leader Luc Ferrandez.
Credit: RENE BRUEMMER; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / A pedestrian walks on an icy sidewalk in Montreal after the ice storm this month. The city has received thousandsof calls complaining about icy streets and sidewalks.

