No fear of flying allowed. It's part of the job description.
For the last 11 years, optometrist Jim Donnelly, optician son Shawn and, a little later down the road, optician son Steffan, have been taking turns flying to Nunavut every three weeks to visit 14 communities and treat people with vision problems.
One optician plus one optometrist selected from a rotating roster spend two weeks in this northernmost territory of Canada for each visit. There's very little down time and a big part of the challenge is embracing the rigours of travelling from community to community in small aircraft commonly used to access isolated areas.
The ride can get bumpy. "We make it clear to optometrists who want to join us. No fear of flying allowed," Shawn Donnelly said.
"To reach the furthest community is an eight-hour flight and we land and take off eight times."
The Donnelly family has run Optique Donnelly in Pointe-Claire for 40 years. Jim Donnelly no longer owns the business, but he continues to practise one day a week to keep his licence active and he continues to travel to Nunavut - on a reduced schedule - to treat patients with diabetic retinopathy.
The 68-year-old spends winters in Florida, which is where a reporter reached him by conference call from Optique Donnelly last week.
"We see as many patients as possible. Non-stop, from morning to night," he said.
Lists of patients are complied by the local CLSCs and an interpreter is available to help when communication breaks down.
All three Donnellys have picked up some Inuktitut over the years.
"When I learn a new word, I'm so proud," Steffan Donnelly said. "And then I fly to the next community and they have their own dialect and don't understand me. The learning process is ongoing."
It was Jim and Shawn Donnelly who made the inaugural trip 11 years ago. The hospital in the region was looking to change its vision care staff and Donnelly was asked if he would consider taking over the responsibility. An optometrist connected to Optique Donnelly had been living and working in the region for a spell and had made solid connections with the population.
"I always wanted to travel and work," Shawn Donnelly said. "But this is more than a travelling gig. We're providing a service that is desperately needed."
The two experienced some resistance at the beginning. It took awhile to gain the patients' trust. Gaining trust was doable. Battling mother nature in the far north remains a no-win situation.
"The weather is our biggest challenge," Jim Donnelly said.
"When a blizzard sets in, there's nothing we can do and we're on a tight schedule. I hate like heck to miss (visiting patients) because of a snowstorm. What we do is not a caprice. It's an essential service. The diabetic population is increasing year to year." (Without proper care, vision loss is a real possibility for people with diabetes.)
"The working conditions can be less than ideal, with cramped examination facilities and bad lighting," Shawn Donnelly said. "And there is always something that breaks. I've become quite resourceful over the years - a bit of a MacGyver. I've fixed problems using a cotton swab. You can't be a princess and do this job. You need to be flexible, self-sufficient, stay calm under pressure and be a problem solver."
The two-member team takes along a stock of eyeglass frames so that patients can select the frames they like. The lens cutting is done in Montreal. Transporting the lens cutting machinery would be prohibitively expensive.
The terrain, the culture, the language and the more languid rhythm of life is completely different to life in Montreal, and over the years, the Donnellys have fallen in love - both with the location and its inhabitants.
"We arrive with our Montrealpace mentality, but we can't impose that pace. We have to adapt to their rhythm," Steffan Donnelly said.
The logistics involved to prepare for the trips are so extensive, they have a full-time employee - Carole Boisvert - whose work focuses only on that.
"She's our lifeline," Shawn Donnelly said.
Donnelly's third son, Kevin, did not enter the family business, but he helps with the marketing and set up the Optique Donnelly website - www.donnellyoptical.com. kgreenaway@postmedia.com
Credit: KATHRYN GREENAWAY; The Gazette
Illustration JOHN MAHONEY / Opticians Steffan (left) and Shawn Donnelly provide vision care to 14 communities in Nunavut.

