Your strawberries are not as sweet as usual? Blame the rain.
Quebec strawberries - known for their sugary, even cotton-candy like sweetness - are missing their signature taste so far this season. Producers say the rainier-thannormal weather since the growing season began is to blame.
"They look good, but they're not as sweet as usual," said Charles Gingras, one of the owners of Chez Louis, a store at the Jean-Talon Market. "That's all the water (rainfall) that's doing that. It might get better because we're expecting some heat and sun. Strawberry season lasts until October, so it can change."
Gingras said the best strawberries so far this season come from Ile d'Orleans, an island just outside Quebec City.
"They also last longer; you can keep those strawberries for four or five days without a problem," he said. "The strawberries from around Montreal go soft in a couple of days, but it's almost always like that."
He said while some of the berries may not taste as good as usual, they are selling for a good price.
"If there is a shortage of production, the price could double or even triple in price," he said. "That's not the case right now."
On the other side of the market, Thomas Ramon, an employee of Ferme Rene Lussier, based in St-Damase, near St-Hyacinthe, said it's still possible to find excellenttasting strawberries, but you have to search. He recommends people taste the berries before buying them. The farm where Ramon works doesn't grow strawberries, but buys them from local producers at a centralized market of growers to resell in Jean-Talon Market.
"The strawberries are still sweet, but it depends where you get them from," Ramon said. "We usually get them from a farm in St-Nicolas, but this week, we chose strawberries from the Laval region (because they tasted better)."
Other crops have also been affected by the weather.
Daniel Brais, the owner of Ferme des Moissons, based in St-Urbain Premier, about 40 kilometres southwest of Montreal, said the cold weather has been giving him trouble, too.
"If we can have some nice heat waves, that will help a lot; we need some warm nights," Brais said. "Vegetables grow 24 hours per day, so if it gets cold at night, their growth will slow down quite a bit."
And too much rain can spread disease to crops, he added.
Among the crops that were most affected by the rain or cold weather were fresh herbs like basil, garlic, beets and beans, he said.
Patrice Juneau, a spokesperson for the Union des producteurs agricoles, which represents farmers across the province, said growers have not told him they're concerned about the weather so far this summer. He said grains and cereals were planted about three weeks later than usual because the fields were too wet, but it's possible to make up some of that delay by the end of the season.
"It's not an alarming situation," Juneau said. "We did see some delays with grains, like corn and soya, but a summer is long, so it's still too soon to say if we will have a good season or not."
Juneau said there has been a bit of a delay in getting strawberries to market, but production appears to be at its normal level for this time of the season.
Gingras said having a season delayed by a few weeks is not a big deal at this point, as long as the weather heats up for the rest of the summer. He said experienced growers are used to dealing with variations in weather.
"Last year was the total opposite," he said. "Summer came so early that everything came up very fast." jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/JasonMagder Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist
Credit: JASON MAGDER; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Quebec strawberries - known for their sugary, even cotton-candy like sweetness - are missing their signature taste.

