It was a very good year for Quebec books. Newcomers crashed the scene, trusted names were in top form, and translations bridged the language gap with a frequency and speed seldom seen. Here, in no special order, is a genre-spanning selection of 2018 highlights.
In Rawi Hage's fourth novel, Beirut Hellfire Society (Knopf Canada), a second-generation undertaker makes his jaded but clear-eyed way through a war-ravaged city, serving the loose-knit titular community whose unconventional lives require an equally unconventional handling in death. Rarely has a novel of ideas worn its philosophical enquiry so lightly: Hage somehow keeps things moving at an airport-thriller pace. You'll be reminded of predecessors ranging from Dante to Cormac McCarthy to Roberto Bolao, but mostly you'll be left thinking that there are no apparent limits to what Hage can do.
Dimitri Nasrallah's novel The Bleeds (Esplanade/Véhicule) is set in an unnamed Central Asian republic where the visionary founder's son is a despot whose heir-apparent son, in turn, is a playboy wastrel. It's the latter's story Nasrallah tells, and he nails his protagonist's infuriating cocktail of arrogance, fecklessness and unchecked privilege, deftly balancing the horrifying and the hilarious. Best of all, he doesn't overplay the topicality hand: readers are left to draw their own contemporary real-life parallels, and there won't be any shortage to choose from.
Kim Thúy's three novels comprise an ongoing, impressionistic, non-linear account of one woman's journey from wartime Vietnam to contemporary Quebec. Packed with finely observed sensory detail, flawless thumbnail character studies and exquisite set pieces, they're not a word longer than they need to be. The newest instalment, Vi (Vintage Canada), continues Thúy's fruitful matchup with translator Sheila Fischman. Readers will be forgiven for hoping this project runs indefinitely.
The opening pages of Antigone Undone: Juliette Binoche, Anne Carson, Ivo van Hove and the Art of Resistance (University of Regina Press) find Will Aitken in professional doldrums and personal depression, out of sorts in wintertime Amsterdam. A way out is presented with the offer to observe van Hove's theatrical mounting of Carson's Sophocles translation. A behind-the-scenes, making-of-the-play account told with a novelist's instinct for drama, Antigone Undone is also an eloquent testimony to the difference art can make in a person's life. If you happen to be a big Binoche fan - and what sensible person isn't? - all the better.
With the publication last summer of Eric Dupont's Songs for the Cold of Heart (Baraka), English readers were finally able to get up to speed with the popular phenomenon of the huge-selling 2012 novel La fiancée Américaine. Shortlisted for the Scotiabank Giller Prize in its Peter McCambridge translation, Songs is an old-school, multigeneration, globe-spanning epic, its formal ambitions grounded by its sure-handed storytelling instincts and its deep roots in rural Quebec. Saul Bellow's The Adventures of Augie March is a high bar, but Dupont earns the comparison.
Eliza Robertson's Demi-Gods (Penguin Canada) pulled off a surprise QWF Best Fiction win this year with its grippingly noir telling of how a sibling childhood conflict leaves a trail across the ensuing decades. David Lynch might be a partial reference point here, but really Robertson's voice is her own, and she sustains it from start to finish. Bonus points for the "No spoilers, please" ending of the year.
In the last stages of a battle with cancer, cartoonist Geneviève Castrée was determined to make a book for her young daughter; A Bubble (Drawn & Quarterly) is the result. Told from the child's perspective, and employing the form of a book for young readers even though it will appeal equally to adults, it's a touching portrayal of the primal mother-child bond and an abject lesson in how to get the maximum emotional impact from minimal materials.
Russian-born Mikhail Iossel, a teacher at Concordia who divides his time between Montreal and the United States, is old enough to have sharp first-hand memories of the pre-glasnost USSR; he has also kept in close touch with what Vladimir Putin has wrought. Notes from Cyberground: Trumpland and My Old Soviet Feeling (New Europe) finds him righteously grappling, in diary form, with the ongoing aftermath of the 2016 American presidential election, the result of which is bringing back all the wrong kinds of memories for someone who has seen authoritarianism close up before. "Let's give Trump credit for keeping the flames of our indignation with him alive and burning bright," Iossel writes, and in a very different way his cathartic book does the same.
Claire Holden Rothman's Lear's Shadow (Penguin Canada), inspired by her experience as a stagehand in a Shakespeare-in-the-park production, is a finely layered novel with a father-daughter relationship at its core, an underpinning of up-to-date climate anxiety thanks to its setting in a Montreal heat wave, and an indelible character in an aging roué, problem-drinking stage ham who steals every scene he's in.
Paige Cooper's Zolitude (Biblioasis) separated itself from the pack of debut story collections by dint of the author's razor-sharp prose and unerring portraits of alienation and displacement both literal and symbolic. The approach is one of hyper-realism, but with sci-fi elements lurking around the edges and occasionally creeping centre stage. A typical Cooper story starts in one place and, by stages so subtle you hardly notice, ends up somewhere else completely. Which might be another way of saying there's no such thing as a typical Cooper story.
Louise Penny's Insp. Gamache series, a melding of old-style whodunit and police procedural, is now 14 instalments to the good, and showing no fatigue thanks to the author's unerring knack for combining familiarity and surprise. Kingdom of the Blind (Minotaur) continues a plot thread begun two books back in which Gamache runs into serious career trouble thanks to his unorthodox handling of the growing opioid crisis. Enticingly, Penny is allowing her chief Inspector to show signs of late-middle-age wear and tear, inviting speculation as to how much longer he can handle the demands of his work. Stay tuned.
Catherine Leroux's Madame Victoria (Biblioasis) addresses one of modern-day Montreal's great unsolved mysteries. In 2001, the skeletal remains of a woman were found in the trees behind the now-closed Royal Victoria Hospital. Her identity has still not been determined. Speculating on the fundamental questions - who was she, and how did she get there? - Leroux imagines a series of possible lives and tells them via a series of stories told in a variety of genres. Each component can stand alone, but cumulatively they play off each other with ever-increasing resonance, adding up to something original and haunting.
Non-drivers among us have found our champion in Stanley Péan. The popular Montreal writer and broadcaster makes his English-language debut, translated by David Homel, with Taximan: Stories and Anecdotes from the Backseat (Linda Leith Publishing). A set of encounters rendered in unassuming miniature comprise a kaleidoscopic urban portrait that captures the essence of the Haitian-born author's adopted city.
Even with five and a half years'distance, the scale of what happened at Lac-Mégantic on July 6, 2013 can still be hard to comprehend. With The Lac-Mégantic Rail Disaster: Public Betrayal, Justice Denied (Lorimer), Bruce Campbell performs a service by getting it all between two covers. Itemizing the confluence of avoidable conditions that caused the catastrophe, and not afraid to assign blame, the book pays tribute to a resilient community even as it leaves us with the uneasy feeling that, if fundamental changes aren't made, something similar might happen again somewhere.
Norths: Two Suitcases and a Stroller Around the Circumpolar World (Conundrum) is an account by Chicoutimi-born Alison McCreesh of an epic trip made with her partner and their two-year-old son around the world above the 60th parallel north. Structured as a daily series of drawn postcards and pithy written messages, the book vividly evokes places most of us will never visit, with insights into communities and ecosystems at the coalface of climate change.
The curatorial impulse was well represented in 2018, and in a variety of ways. Dirty Plotte: The Complete Julie Doucet (Drawn & Quarterly) gives Montreal's groundbreaking underground cartoonist the star treatment she deserves. The Flame: Poems and Selections from Notebooks (McClelland & Stewart) gathers Leonard Cohen's final poems along with a selection of late-period lyrics and drawings for a valedictory portrait of a giant; The Good Lands: Canada Through the Eyes of Artists (Figure 1) is an unprecedentedly comprehensive and inclusive gathering of landscape works that has the power to make us look at the country in new ways. ianmcgillis2@gmail.com
CREDIT: IAN MCGILLIS;The Gazette

