After the basement in their Pierrefonds home was flooded on May 7, 2017, Zofia and Ped Malek cashed in their life savings and rolled up their sleeves to do the repairs themselves.
The Maleks were among about 6,000 property owners who sustained damage during last year's historic flooding in the Montreal area.
Now nearly a year later, the Maleks are still waiting for the province to come through with money promised by the disaster relief fund set up in the wake of the flooding.
Zofia, 68, is earning a government pension, while Ped, 64, is unemployed but not yet eligible to retire, so they depend on the rental income from two units in their triplex on Des Maçons St.
Immigrants from Poland, the Maleks said they were exhausted as they logged 12-hour days between May and September, spending 590 hours in total to get their basement rental apartment repaired, and another 110 hours to repair their own basement family room and the utility room that has the furnace and hot-water tanks that serve their home and the two rental units.
"We haven't received even a penny from the provincial government," a sobbing Zofia told the Montreal Gazette on Thursday, showing copies of a six-inch high pile of papers she has submitted to the province. "It's been so much stress, and we had to file so much paperwork."
Greg Domagala, the couple's son-in-law who helps manage the property, said they received a quotation from a contractor to replace drywall and flooring, rebuild two bathrooms and replace hot-water tanks, but it was far too expensive.
"The estimate came in at $80,000," Domagala said. "They almost fell off their chairs when they saw it."
Since the government wouldn't pay upfront and their financial status probably made them ineligible for a line of credit or a new mortgage on the property, the Maleks said they felt they had no choice but to dip into their savings to pay for the repairs.
The Maleks received about $20,000 from their home insurance to cover some personal possessions, but they were promised by the government they would be covered for the materials needed to rebuild the basement.
The couple also lost rental income. The total for repairs and lost rent comes out to more than $50,000, Domagala estimates.
But the Maleks have received no payment from the government, and they now fear they'll never receive that money because the disaster relief fund gives applicants a one-year deadline from the time the claim is opened to complete repairs, which in their case gives them until the end of May. However, without any more money coming in, the Maleks can't afford to replace their furnace that was damaged in the flood.
"The furnace could go out, and then they will really be in trouble," Domagala said.
"They also have a few other unresolved issues, but they don't want to go into debt because they don't know if they will ever get paid. They have lost faith."
Domagala has been managing communication with the province because the Maleks aren't fluent in French or English.
He's made numerous calls to Quebec's public security ministry, which manages the disaster relief fund, but hasn't yet received an answer on why it's taking so long for the government to pay.
A month ago, a provincial inspector came to the house to assess the repairs, and the Maleks were told a cheque would be arriving in a week, but they're still waiting.
"We have submitted everything the ministry has asked for: all the bills, all the time that they spent doing the renovations, and any purchase as small or as large as they come," Domagala said. "We have had acknowledgment that the ministry received the documents."
Last Friday, the Maleks missed a phone call from a ministry claims handler. When Domagala called back on Tuesday, the worker refused to speak with them.
"We spoke to his secretary, and he wouldn't even come onto the phone," Domagala said.
Vincent Richard, who has been living in the Maleks'basement unit for 18 years, said he's forever grateful to the couple for being good landlords and for doing the repairs so quickly. Richard was lodged at the Marriott airport hotel for four months while the repairs were being done.
"These people really came through for me," Richard said. "When I think of it, I get really emotional. They managed to get me out of the hotel in four months, but the government has not come through for them."
Richard said if he were still being lodged in a hotel, as was the case for about 44 families last month, it would have cost the government another $40,000 in hotel fees and food allowance.
The Maleks aren't the only flood victims still waiting for payment. Others on the same street have also not received compensation. The public security ministry claims nearly all flood victims have received at least some payment, saying 86 per cent of claimants received between 75 and 90 per cent of the financial aid requested as of April 10.
However, when asked specifically how many files have been closed, Louise Quintin, a spokesperson for the ministry, said only 26 per cent of claimants were fully paid as of April 10.
The ministry wasn't able to provide specific answers about why the Maleks haven't yet received any payment. jmagder@postmedia.com twitter.com/jasonmagder facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

