A chief inspector who until recently was the head of the Montreal police internal affairs department appears to be the common thread connecting several recent controversies that have rattled the police force.
Within less than a year, Costa Labos was cleared in one police investigation and became the subject of another alleging he prevented two Montreal police officers from providing evidence that might have cleared a homicide detective of wrongdoing in 2009.
When the police spying scandal erupted last fall, Labos acknowledged that he authorized the surveillance of La Presse journalist Patrick Lagace's cellphone. Labos is also one of the people at the centre of the storm following allegations that surfaced in TVA's investigative report that aired on Tuesday. And, earlier this month, charges produced through an investigation supervised by Labos were stayed by a judge after Crown prosecutors announced they would not prosecute Andre Thibodeau, a former Montreal police sergeant who was charged with illegal bookmaking, because they could not proceed with the evidence gathered by the Montreal police internal affairs department.
When Thibodeau's case was tossed out he alleged, to the Montreal Gazette, that internal affairs investigators "lied to justices of the peace" in order to obtain warrants in the bookmaking investigation. The allegations are similar to what was reported in TVA's story on Tuesday. On Wednesday, Thibodeau declined to comment on TVA's report because there are issues related to his case he is still seeking to have resolved.
The investigation Labos was cleared in, in September, involved allegations he lied to a judge in order to obtain a warrant to search the home of Roger Lariviere, a now-retired Montreal police detective after he was spotted at a restaurant on Mont-Royal Ave., on Oct. 9, 2014, with journalist Stephane Berthomet. The investigation involved whether Labos lied in saying he had information that Lariviere (who was interviewed in TVA's story) leaked sensitive information to the journalist.
Lariviere called the investigation abusive and one that tarnished his reputation in a lawsuit he filed in 2015 seeking compensation for being turned down for a promotion to be named commander of a neighbourhood police station. In December, a Superior Court judge set the limit for what Lariviere can sue for at $700,000. The case is still pending.
In September, Montreal police Chief Philippe Pichet said Labos continued to have his support after he was cleared in the investigation involving Lariviere. But weeks later Labos was transferred to a position leaving him in charge of the department that handles 911 calls.
In an interview with Radio-Canada on Wednesday, Pichet confirmed that Labos is currently being investigated by the Surete du Quebec for something that was alleged in open court, in 2010, during the trial of Mario Lambert, a former Montreal police homicide detective who was charged in 2009 with the improper use of a police database. Lambert was convicted of fraud in 2012 but that was later overturned by the Quebec Court of Appeal.
The SQ is investigating whether Labos prevented the internal affairs investigators assigned to the case from talking to two detectivesergeants who claimed they had information that would clear Lambert, whose career was ruined after he was charged.
Since news of the investigation involving Lariviere surfaced eight months ago, Labos has been the subject of many news articles. But he has generated headlines in the past as well. In 1998, the Quebec police ethics committee suspended Labos for four days for his behaviour while he and five other police officers raided an apartment in Plateau Mont-Royal in 1995.
The officers were looking for a suspect in a series of armed robberies. The man wasn't home but his parents were. During the raid, the suspect's mother informed Labos her son wasn't home. Labos allegedly replied by saying: "Shut up, you bitch" and pointed his service firearm at the suspect's father. The couple also alleged that Labos threatened revenge if they complained about his conduct.
The couple later sued Labos and the Montreal police for nearly $30,000. The case was settled out of court in 2002. pcherry@postmedia.com
Credit: PAUL CHERRY; The Gazette
ALLEN MCINNIS / Montreal police Chief Philippe Pichet confirmed that chief inspector Costa Labos is currently being investigated by the Surete du Quebec.

