After freezing rain blanketed the city's streets and sidewalks with a sheet of ice Monday morning, Montrealers should brace for more extreme weather, with up to 30 centimetres of snow expected Tuesday evening and into Wednesday.
Montreal received between two and 10 millimetres of freezing rain on Monday, according to Environment Canada.
The result was icy sidewalks and streets throughout the city, with a number of people reporting falls or tumbles on social media.
Rhiannon Collett, a 20-year-old playwright, slipped and fell on the sidewalk in front of her Visitation St. apartment in the Village as soon as she stepped offher porch.
"Directly in front of my neighbour who was trying to wrangle both of her children (down the sidewalk)," Collett said Monday morning.
She ended up walking down the middle of the street instead to get to the metro and head to work - it was less slippery than the sidewalk, she said.
"It is a nightmare," Collett said. "Basically I'm just waiting for the frozen hell-sphere to melt!" Urgences-Sante said it was receiving an usually high number of calls because of the weather, and recommended people make sure they have a sturdy pair of boots on, or even use a cane with an ice pick attached to the end if they plan on walking a lot.
Spokesperson Benoit Garneau said that as of 10:30 a.m., Urgences-Sante had received roughly 450 calls in the Montreal area, about 100 more than on a normal winter day.
A hundred ambulances had been dispatched to cover the area, and it was asking people to please call hospitals first if they didn't consider their injuries to be an emergency, to avoid overfilling hospital waiting rooms.
Calls started coming in around 6:45 a.m., Garneau said.
"As soon as people started going outside," he said, adding that people are falling on sidewalks, in stairways, garage entrances or commercial parking lots.
Most injuries are bruises or sprains, he said, but some are worse: broken wrists, forearms or elbows as people try to protect themselves before hitting the ice.
The 911 calls, however, began to stabilize around 1 p.m. as conditions on the sidewalks and roads improved.
City officials say there are multiple reasons why removing ice remains a perennial issue. They include the amount of time it takes to clear thousands of kilometres of sidewalks, inadequate equipment and a cocktail of rapidly evolving climatic conditions that can make it hard to keep up.
And if Monday's weather wasn't enough winter misery, Environment Canada is warning of a "major storm" developing over the Central United States that will move into Quebec.
The snow is expected to begin falling on Tuesday evening, "with snowfall amounts possibly exceeding 30 centimetres," Environment Canada warns on its website.
"Surfaces such as highways, roads, walkways and parking lots may become difficult to navigate due to accumulating snow." jfeith@postmedia.com twitter.com/jessefeith
Montrealers celebrate Leap Year by tiptoeing on icy sidewalks
It may be called Leap Year Day, but Feb. 29 had Montrealers tiptoeing carefully on ice-covered sidewalks and roads.
Ever wonder how the city tackles the problem of slippery sidewalks? City of Montreal spokesperson Jacques-Alain Lavallee explained that city crews do not use the same "recipe" of abrasives for sidewalks and roadways. For roads: "For pavement, we mainly use pure salt. If the temperature is cold (between -10 C and -15 C), crushed stone is added to the salt because it is less (effective). The mixture is 50/50 per cent salt/stone. If the temperature drops below -15 C, we use a mixture of 10/90 per cent salt/stone."
For sidewalks? "We almost always use the mixture 10/90 per cent salt/stone."
Why isn't pure salt used on sidewalks?
"Pure salt is mainly used on roadways because (vehicle) traffic has the effect of releasing the heat required for the chemical reaction.
"The material placed on sidewalks serves a dual purpose: to cause the salt to melt and the abrasive (crushed stone) to enable traction."
Why do roads seem better deiced than sidewalks?
"For one, the vehicles run much faster than pedestrians. This intensive vehicle traffic gives off the heat required to cause the chemical reaction of salt to melt the ice. Tire friction caused by traffic is another important factor in the process of melting ice."
jmeagher@postmedia.com
Credit: JESSE FEITH; The Gazette
Illustration JOHN KENNEY / Residents like Dimitrios Geros had to clear ice from their cars on St-Roch St. in the Park Extension area after freezing rain earlier in the day on Monday.

