If Toronto Maple Leafs mercurial forward Phil Kessel has a fan club in Montreal, you could probably hold its meetings in a bus shelter.
But know this: the president of that club might be Canadiens defenceman P.K. Subban, who can't - from where he stands at a bit of a distance - understand how Kessel has become the lightning rod for all that is rotten with the Maple Leafs.
"I don't think it's deserved, some of the stuffthat they've gone through this year," Subban began generally of the Maple Leafs after the Canadiens' 2-1 shootout victory over Toronto on Saturday.
And then he turned his attention specifically to Kessel, whose jersey crest isn't so much an 11-or-more point maple leaf as it is a bulls-eye.
Kessel might or might not still be in Toronto after the March 2 NHL trade deadline.
Some think he still has shelf life in the Queen City after having played 421 of his 643 NHL games with the Maple Leafs.
Others, well, they have thoughtfully packed his bags for him and purchased his one-way ticket.
In Montreal, Subban scratches his head at the commotion, having more than a bit of first-hand experience at being in the centre of a storm.
"Phil's a guy who cares about his team, about hockey, about the Toronto Maple Leafs," said Subban, who had battled with Kessel throughout Saturday's game and even gave his opponent a pat on the back as both lay exhausted and tangled on the ice at the end of overtime.
"I know how much he cares about Toronto because in the summertime when we have dinner, we get into beaking matches about the team. I tell him Toronto is my city (it's Subban's hometown) and he's like: 'No, no, no, no, no!' "He's passionate about it. He's a great player, he's a world-class player, he's among the top guys in the league for goals for the past, I don't know, five, six, seven years?" (Kessel is a top-10 ranking NHL scorer the past three seasons, in fact, but a 30-or-moregoal marksman in four of his five full seasons in Toronto.)
"I know he's an elite player in this league. I thought he was working hard today," Subban said of Kessel.
"He worked his bag offto try to make the difference for their team. The last battle at the end of the game, I gave him a tap because he's been working hard. I think he should be appreciated for that."
Kessel has had his moments - hours, even - with the Toronto media and even a former coach.
In early January, ex-Leafs coach Ron Wilson charged in a TSN Radio interview that Kessel cannot be coached.
"You can't rely on Phil," Wilson said. "When he's not playing well, he's a hard guy to get on board and get on your side. He shows obvious signs of brilliance, but Phil's problem - it's pretty much the way he's been through his career - he's two weeks on and two weeks off.
"It's just the way it is. He comes and goes and he gets emotional. He lets that affect his game and his relationship with other players. That's what you have to coach."
Wilson's remarks promptly touched offa fiery confrontation between Kessel and Toronto Star columnist Dave Feschuk, who asked Kessel to comment on them.
Six or so weeks earlier, Kessel had been asked to explain why the sad-sack Leafs had just been blown out by the sadder-sack Buffalo Sabres and he snapped at his questioner: "Get away from me."
While the manure was raining down on him, Kessel had support from former Leafs GM Brian Burke.
At a sports management conference a couple of days after Kessel's Sabres meltdown, Burke asked: "Why should Phil Kessel have to talk to these (media) pukes every day?" Subban admits it's hard to have a full read on the dynamics of the relationship Kessel has with Toronto's media and many
Maple Leafs fans. But he suggests the embattled player is at least a little misunderstood.
"Phil is a personable guy if he knows you," Subban said. "If you put a microphone in his face and you're asking him stupid questions, he's not going to show that side of himself.
"But I've gotten to know him really well and I don't think he gets enough credit for showing his personality. He's an outgoing guy and he's really funny. I just don't get it. I don't get the rap that he gets for his personality and the type of guy that he is. He's a great guy."
Asked whether Kessel might be shy in the spotlight, Subban replied: "He's shy because of the stuffthat (the media are) asking him. If he feels that there's a motive behind the questions that you're asking him, he's not going to respond."
Having been in the white-hot spotlight of Montreal since he arrived for good during the 2010 playoffs, Subban can speak to the waves of media that wash up at a player's stall day after day.
"I think there's a sense of (media) class here, a sense of professionalism here," Subban said of his Montreal experience. "That's not to bad-mouth the Toronto media. I've never been a player there so I can't comment.
"But some of the things I've seen happen in Toronto I haven't seen happen here and I don't think they would ever happen here."
dstubbs@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/dave_stubbs
Credit: DAVE STUBBS; The Gazette
Illustration JOHN KENNEY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / P.K. Subban of the Canadiens, centre, and the Leafs' Phil Kessel engaged in a hard-fought battle throughout Saturday's game at the Bell Centre.

