After 11 months of the historic, sweeping American
presidential election, the race here in Quebec, where campaign
conflicts are of the much more entertaining front room variety
whereby someone actually calls the cops, makes for a nice change of
pace.
Liberal Premier Jean Charest called this election the day after the
U.S. presidential race concluded and three weeks after Canada's vote
in the apparent belief that a day without an election -- federal,
provincial, American, whatever -- is like a day without sunshine.
His public explanation was that with the U.S. economic meltdown
going global, he needs a majority government to marshal its impact
in Quebec.
"We can't face an economic storm with three different pairs of
hands on the rudder of our ship," he cautioned.
A Leger Marketing poll conducted last weekend for Sun Media's Le
Journal de Montreal, its TVA network and CanWest's Montreal Gazette,
indicates voters weren't buying it.
The results, released yesterday, show Charest's Liberals at 41% --
down a point from the last week of October. Pauline Marois' Parti
Quebecois is at 35% -- up a point from that last poll. Mario
Dumont's Action Democratique du Quebec is unchanged 14%.
The two most important things about this poll are that all the
shifts are within the margins of error and that it was conducted
largely before the worst news of the first few days of the campaign,
which tilted toward the PQ, including the nomination meeting brawl
of Saturday night, the news that the party is broke and a leak of
the party's own focus group results showing people think Marois is a
snob.
LABOUR ON FENCE
Rounding out the headlines in week one was the news that the
Federation des Travailleurs du Quebec, the traditional endorsement
equivalent of the Teamsters for the Democratic Party in the U.S.,
will be sitting on the fence.
Charest was taking heat yesterday for balking at a roundtable
format for the leaders debate, but anyone who saw even five minutes
of the federal version knows it's hard to look leaderish when you're
stuck in the political equivalent of a bad day on The View.
Action Democratique Leader Mario Dumont, having failed to use his
time in official opposition to establish himself in the minds of
voters as a potential premier, is campaigning on the same
inward-looking message he espoused during the reasonable
accommodation debate, directed at the same culture clash voters,
this time targeting the province's new mandatory Ethics and
Religious Culture course.
Marois, meanwhile, is being stalked by a chorus of radical hardline
sovereignists who support mandatory political discourse on the one
issue nobody feels like talking about, especially in an economic
meltdown (that's how the fist fight broke out).
In a speech to the Montreal Board of Trade last week, Charest mused
that, in tough economic times, it isn't Dumont who'll be signing
immigration deals and it won't be Marois who'll be negotiating a
common market with Ontario. In other words, why vote for someone
whose economic options are limited by other issues?
It's another month until Dec. 8, but if this keeps up, an election
call that seemed opportunistic and strangely heedless of what had
just not happened in the federal election could start to look not so
crazy after all.