Alex Galchenyuk looked a lot more comfortable in his skin when he met with the Montreal media Thursday morning at the Gila River Arena before facing the Canadiens for the first time Thursday night as a member of the Arizona Coyotes.
Galchenyuk appeared to be in a good mood while answering questions for more than eight minutes. He also seemed very calm, unlike the deer-in-the-headlights look he often had during media scrums as a member of the Canadiens when he seemed to measure his words very, very carefully. On Thursday morning, the 24-yearold seemed relaxed and honest in his answers.
"I'm not going to lie ... I'm not going to stand here and say it's just another day and another game," Galchenyuk said about facing the Canadiens for the first time since last summer's trade that sent him to Arizona in exchange for Max Domi. "I have so many friends on the other team and playing for the first time (against them) it's always a little bit different. I spent six years in Montreal."
What was the biggest lesson Galchenyuk learned - on and/or off the ice - during those six seasons after being selected third overall at the 2012 NHL Draft? "I'll be here all day," he said with a smile. "I learned a lot, not just as a hockey player. As a human being, I matured a lot. A lot of things that happened over the last six years have definitely helped not just my career, but my life in general."
It would be nice to see things work out for Galchenyuk in sunny Arizona and away from the bright Montreal spotlight. The pressure was always on him in Montreal, whether it came from management, fans, the media or his family, with his ever-present father and sister. There were times I actually felt sorry for him. But while Domi has thrived in the Montreal spotlight, Galchenyuk has struggled in Arizona. Heading into Thursday night's game, Domi had 14-19-33 totals in 35 games and was plus-4, while Galchenyuk had 3-8-11 totals in 23 games and was minus-7.
"I don't feel any extra pressure because of who I got traded for," Galchenyuk said. "I still have to do my job, be the player like I was and be better. That's the way I look at it."
Things got off to a bad start in Arizona for Galchenyuk when he suffered a lower-body injury during training camp and missed the first seven games of the regular season. He missed three more games this month with a lower-body injury and had gone 14 games without a goal before facing the Canadiens. He has also been moved from centre to the wing - the same thing that happened in Montreal.
"I spoke to (coach Rick Tocchet) before the situation and he said you're better off on the wing and see if I can do a little bit more offensive there, and that's fine," Galchenyuk said.
"I'm here to help my team win.
I got to be better, whether it's centre or wing."
Tocchet said he really likes Galchenyuk and is trying to help him.
"He's a coachable kid," Tocchet said. "He really wants to get better. He recognizes that he's got to get better in certain areas of his game, which I like. He's recognizing it. He's a great kid to work with. A really great personality, I love working with him. Obviously, positional hockey is something he's got to work on."
Maybe Tocchet will eventually have better luck with Galchenyuk on that front than Michel Therrien or Claude Julien did with the Canadiens. Time will tell.
Life is a lot different for Galchenyuk now in Arizona, both on and off the ice. While Montrealers were bracing for a blast of freezing rain Thursday night, it was sunny and 23 C in Arizona - just a gorgeous day.
"I feel like even if I wasn't a hockey player, only human, you move from Montreal to Arizona, it's already a completely different environment," Galchenyuk said. "That being said, hockey's still the same game. The game doesn't change, but definitely the drive is different, the weather is different. But at the same time, the goal is still the same.
"It was a fresh start and everybody felt like that," he added about the trade.
Does he feel less pressure? "To say less pressure ... I don't know if I'll use that because at the end of the day whatever is pressure in Montreal, pressure here, I still have a lot of pressure," Galchenyuk said.
"I put a lot of pressure on myself to succeed and, obviously, the media coverage is completely different and all that stuff. But it was never really a big deal for me, the media in Montreal or the media here. I always put a lot of pressure on myself to perform."
On Thursday morning, Galchenyuk certainly looked and sounded like there was a lot less pressure on his shoulders. scowan@postmedia.com Twitter.com/StuCowan1
CREDIT: STU COWAN;The Gazette

