For 140 minutes, Canada held its breath.
A see-saw Yes-No battle raged through the evening of Oct. 30, 1995, capping a four-week campaign that began with the No side leading 60-40 and ended with polls showing a 50-50 split.
Tension was running high and the deep divisions would eventually spill into the streets, albeit briefly, with riot police breaking up confrontations between bitter Yes and celebrating No supporters on Ste-Catherine St.
But before the scuffles, before Premier Jacques Parizeau's infamous concession speech, before a chastened prime minister Jean Chretien addressed the nation from an Ottawa studio, before investigations into whether the No side cheated by funding a unity rally at Place du Canada and whether the Yes side cheated by rejecting valid No votes, there was the counting of the ballots.
And the waiting. Between the end of voting at 8 p.m. and the declaration of a winner at 10:20 p.m., most Quebecers were glued to their TV sets.
This is a look back at those tense hours, based on news coverage and interviews with former premier Jean Charest, at the time leader of the Progressive Conservatives and a prominent No campaigner; and Parti Quebecois MNA Jean-Francois Lisee, at the time an adviser and speech writer to Parizeau.
"The mood throughout the day was sombre, and even more so as we were watching the results," recalls Charest, one of the few No leaders who managed to galvanize voters during the campaign. "What I remember is how little people were talking; we just sat there and watched."
"We would whisper among ourselves because (Parizeau) had decided to be silent, to just take it in," Lisee says of the suite where Parizeau and his closest advisers awaited results that night.
PRELUDE: A HISTORIC DAY
It's sunny as dawn breaks in Montreal but it would soon become cloudy, as cloudy as the predictions for what would happen when the yea and nay votes were counted.
Two warriors - Jacques Parizeau and Jean Chretien - awoke that day unsure of their fates.
Parizeau because he had rolled the dice with the referendum call and had been forced to hand the initially struggling Yes camp to the more-popular Lucien Bouchard, without whom the eventual rise in the polls would have been impossible. Chretien because he had squandered a commanding lead in a life-and-death battle for the future of Canada.
The Yes side hoped the youth vote would take it over the top. The No side suspected shy federalists were reluctant to tell pollsters they were voting No but would come through at the ballot box.
As polls open at 10 a.m., the temperature hovers around 2 degrees Celsius. A few flakes would fall that day. But even a blizzard wouldn't have stopped voters. In total, 5,087,009 Quebecers were eligible to vote. Most would do their duty.
Parizeau voted in Outremont and spent much of the rest of the day holed up with advisers at his office at Hydro-Quebec headquarters in downtown Montreal, preparing for the night and the aftermath of a Yes vote. He recorded two 18-minute video messages - one in French, one in English - that would be broadcast in the event of a Yes. Two cameras had been ordered but only one was delivered, so Parizeau couldn't make a mistake as editing would not be possible - he had to shoot each of the messages in one take. In them, he told the world how he would create a new country.
Parizeau also gave a secret TV interview to be broadcast only after the results were known. In it, he said he would quit as premier on referendum night if the result was No (his advisers later convinced him to wait a day).
At about 7:30 p.m., Parizeau and his closest advisers, Jean-Francois Lisee and Jean Royer, and his wife, Lisette Lapointe, moved to a suite overlooking the main hall at the Palais des congres, where the Yes side would await results.
As for Chretien, he awoke in Shawinigan that morning and voted in nearby Grand-Mere before flying back to Ottawa. The No side's referendum-night base was the Metropolis, a Montreal bar/concert venue on Ste-Catherine St., a 10-minute walk from the Yes side HQ.
But Chretien opted to stay in Ottawa, ensconcing himself in 24 Sussex Drive to watch the results, with his wife, Aline, and key advisers including political aide Eddie Goldenberg.
ACT 1 (8 TO 9:30 P.M.): A YES SURGE
8:04 p.m. Early results trickle in. It's Yes, 50.5 per cent; No, 49.8 per cent. Only 95 votes are counted but the 48 vs. 47 count is a taste of what's to come.
Night has fallen. On CBC, a gloomy live shot of a darkened 24 Sussex Dr., light emanating from the glass front door.
In Toronto, former Canadiens great Ken Dryden tells an interviewer: "I'm absolutely nervous here, as if a performance or a game was about to begin but also realizing that things are beyond control."
8:20 p.m. Yes has surged: It's at 56.7 per cent vs. 43.3 per cent for the No.
But there's no jumping up and down in Parizeau's suite. Instead, silence reigns.
"When you're with the premier in the room, the premier sets the tone," PQ MNA Jean-Francois Lisee, a Parizeau adviser at the time, told the Montreal Gazette this month. "If he wants to chat, you chat. If he wants to stay silent, you respect that. And (Parizeau) was silent.
"We were watching the results, we would whisper among ourselves because he had decided to be silent, to just take it in."
Early on "we thought we would win, and so he probably awaited the enormous responsibility that would come with a win. That would have been his moment, his career achievement."
On election nights, "if you're doing well, there's a lot of energy in the room and people are talking and reacting to what's happening," former premier Jean Charest told the Montreal Gazette this month. "A referendum where the issue is the future of the country is pretty unique, so you feel very, very real pressure of what the outcome will be."
Charest is watching the results with his wife, Michele Dionne, and close advisers, in a suite at the Crowne Plaza Hotel on Sherbrooke St. in downtown Montreal.
"We were all very anxious and nervous," he says. With Yes leading, "I was thinking, 'My God, if this is the result of the evening, we're all going to be in a lot of trouble tomorrow morning.' All my instincts told me that folks weren't ready for this, people didn't have a clue what they were going to end up with."
In Ottawa, Chretien, too, is edgy. "We were realists," he would later tell an interviewer. "I didn't know" what the result would be.
"I was nervous." Montreal results, expected to heavily favour the No side, are slow in coming.
Early results show that in other traditional Liberal ridings, the Yes side is doing better than expected.
CBC reports the Canadian dollar has dropped 30 basis points.
A Greek-Canadian is asked what he will do if it's a Yes. "I'll still be here tomorrow," he tells a CBC reporter.
"I'm a Quebecer and I'll stay in Quebec, but it will mean some serious problems."
With Yes now at 55 per cent, singer Richard Seguin, a staunch sovereignist, is jubilant, as is the rest of the crowd at Bar Medley on St. Denis St., where the band Les Colocs is hosting a referendumnight party.
"We don't want to be distinct, we want to be sovereign!" Seguin tells a reporter, in front of a cheering, fleur-de-lis waving crowd. "Yes, we are confident!" Two thousand young, mostly-Yes supporters are crowded into
the Medley, watching the results on giant screens. Colocs frontman Andre (Dede) Fortin had promised that if the Yes side wins, 'we'll celebrate;' if it's a No, 'we'll get drunk.' The mood is more sombre at a seniors' residence in Sherbrooke, where the average age is 78. A reporter tells Radio-Canada anchor Bernard Derome that some of the residents have moved their money to Ontario or New Brunswick in case of a Yes victory. Fearing a Yes, some "practically have their bags packed."
At Montreal's Palais des congres, energized Yes voters are pumped, chanting "Na, na, na, na, hey, hey, hey, goodbye!" In Vancouver, a TV panel of average Canadians weighs in.
One man says he's not worried. Canada can survive if Quebec leaves a hole between Atlantic Canada and the ROC, he says. Look at Alaska and Hawaii - they remain viable despite not being physically connected to the rest of the United States. Next up: a woman says she's "horrified" that voters in one province "can tear the whole country apart."
At the Yes side party, PQ vicepresident Monique Simard is interviewed in front of a boisterous crowd. "I can see the rest of Canada is a bit stunned," she says. That's because "the Canadian political class did not prepare Canadians" for a Yes. She says Canadians should realize that a Yes vote isn't "against Canada and Canadians; it's for Quebec."
8:39 p.m. An estimate of the votes counted so far indicates 92 per cent of anglophones have voted No, as have 79 per cent of allophones. As for francophones, it's 59 per cent Yes. To win, all sides agree, the Yes needs 60 per cent of French-speakers to say "Oui."
"There's a good chance that they (the Yes side) could win it by a percentage point," political scientist Alain Gagnon tells a reporter.
8:52 p.m. Montreal votes still aren't coming in. Speculation is that the long lineups at polling stations mean voters cast ballots after 8 p.m. In ridings that voted No in 1980 (which ended in a No victory, 59.56 per cent to 40.44 per cent), the Yes vote is up by about 12 per cent, a good omen for sovereignists.
At Laval University in Quebec City, two students - a Yes and a No - stand on either side of a reporter.
"Canada is a great country but for me, the best way to take our future in our hands is ... to be sovereign as a nation," one says. On the other side: "I still believe in Canada very much, I still believe that there can be solidarity between both cultures that founded this country."
CBC anchor Peter Mansbridge suggests that, because it's so close, "crisis is the looming word," whether Quebec votes Yes or No.
A prominent No supporter says the federation must change, even if his side wins. "People in Quebec voted for change within Canada and I guess this time around there will be change to prevent us from going through this traumatic experience again," says Marcel Cote, a prominent economist who would go on to run for Montreal's mayoralty.
More Montreal results are trickling in. The western part of the island is heavily No, but the Yes isn't doing as well as expected in the east.
9:05 p.m. The very high turnout rate could give the Yes side an advantage, Lisee tells a reporter, because it likely means more youth went to the polls, and youth tends to vote Yes.
Asked what Parizeau will say in his speech, Lisee isn't specific. "He is a man of state. We say around him that Quebec has a head of state before it has a state, and you'll see it whatever way it turns out."
9:07 p.m. With 30 per cent of ballots counted, it's Yes 50.7 per cent, No 49.3 per cent. Just 20,000 votes separate the two sides.
Won't a close No win lead to more headaches? "The problems of victory are infinitely preferable to the problems of defeat," Liberal MP Brian Tobin tells a reporter.
For young people in Quebec, sovereignty is "a deep conviction. Whatever the result tonight, people across the country - Canada - have to understand that for the young people in Quebec, their country is Quebec and this conviction will still be there," a young Yes organizer tells an interviewer.
At Yes HQ, "we try to remain calm but we believe, we really believe, that it's going to be Yes," Lisette Lapointe, Parizeau's wife and adviser, later recalls.
In Toronto, author Pierre Berton is uneasy. "I haven't had such squeamishness since the Blue Jays entered the World Series (in 1993)," he says. He fears a close No victory would mean "years of negotiation" with Quebec.
The tight race shows a cleavage in the "soul of Quebec," says lawyer Yves Fortier, a prominent No supporter. If it's a Yes, "I can't for the life of me think that we can build a country on that kind of division."
On the same TV panel, Yes campaigner Josee Legault zooms in on the francophone vote - 58 per cent Yes so far. If it's a narrow No victory, "it means you've got a serious legitimacy problem in this country ... and the federal government is going to have to put something on the table," Legault says. No organizer John Parisella answers: "You have a serious legitimacy problem if you have a very close Yes vote." Quebecers' choice was between crisis (a Yes vote) and change (a No vote), he insists. Parisella tells Legault: "I take strong issue to the francophone/anglophone division because when you're talking about the breakup of a country, every vote is equal, every vote counts."
At 24 Sussex, the tension is thick, Chretien adviser Eddie Goldenberg would later tell an interviewer. "I recall myself at one stage being so nervous - we'd been watching it on the second floor of the prime minister's residence. I couldn't take it anymore. I walked downstairs to try to find another television where I could be by myself. We were very, very nervous."
Reports confirm counting has been slow because long lineups led to a delay in the closing of some polls. The few votes that have been counted in Montreal show 66-percent No and 34-per-cent Yes.
In Ottawa, an apprehensive Finance Minister Paul Martin is watching the results in his department's bunker, surrounded by advisers. "I think there were more people there that night than on a normal workday," Martin recalled last year. "But when the results started coming in, you would have heard a pin drop."
9:25 p.m. The race is tightening. Yes, 50.12; No, 49.88. It's deathly quiet at the Palais des congres.
ACT 2 (9:34 P.M. -9:46 P.M.): IT' S TIED
With 65.7 per cent of votes counted, it's 50-50.
After a near-death experience, the crowd at No HQ erupts. They're chanting "Ca-na-da, Ca-na-da!" and singing O Canada.
So far, only the Montreal and Outaouais regions have voted No. The rest of the province is Yes blue.
9:41 p.m. "For a lot of Quebecers, this would be the worst-case scenario," the CBC's Jason Moscovitz says. "The No side winning a narrow victory with the vast majority of French-speaking Quebecers having voted Yes. Tension, social tension - all these things are possible.
... There will be a lot of bitterness."
In Parizeau's suite, it has become clear a Yes will not materialize.
"When we saw the results coming from Quebec City and the Beauce, we saw that we wouldn't have the majority that we needed," Lisee said. Jean Royer, Parizeau's chief of staff, breaks it to the premier. Parizeau doesn't react, maintaining his stoic demeanour. "Quebec City was a clue that we could get through," Charest says. "If the Yes side was going to win they had to have very strong support there, which they were not getting."
But Charest and other No campaigners aren't popping champagne. First, they need to see how much the Montreal vote tally would help.
"This wasn't about winning, this was about survival - about getting through with enough votes to push back and say, 'Well, there's a winner and a loser.' "
ACT 3 (9:47 P.M. -10:19 P.M.): NO TAKES THE LEAD
9:47 p.m. The No side leads by 16,781 votes. So far, 3,584,835 ballots have been counted. At Metropolis, people who had been on the verge of tears earlier are cheering and waving Canadian flags. But with 78.6 per cent of votes counted, it's only 50.2 No, 49.8 Yes.
9:51 p.m. In a Palais des congres suite overlooking the Yes hall, TV cameras capture Jacques Parizeau through a window. He is pacing, a glass in hand.
With 86.5 per cent of votes counted, it's 50.26 No, 49.74 Yes "There is no reason to be depressed if the Yes loses by a very small margin," vice-premier Bernard Landry says on Radio-Canada. "The country we were awaiting tonight we will have maybe tomorrow. ... There's maybe a small delay that will be imposed by democracy."
Sovereignists must pick themselves up, "without bitterness, acrimony or animosity" and continue the battle. "If it's not tonight, it's a matter of time." Landry seems eager to deliver another message to sovereignists. "Let's not seek to lay blame," he says. "We can blame the system, we can blame history - but not men and women who in good faith voted No."
9:53 p.m. CBC notes the apparently high number of rejected ballots in some ridings.
10:08 p.m. The mood is sombre at Yes HQ. "Nationalism is not done in Quebec, and the rest of Canada is going to have to deal with this reality," an impassive Yes supporter tells a reporter. If Yes loses, "Quebec has a great respect for democracy. Everybody will accept the result but the question will not be resolved ... the people of Quebec will continue the battle for recognition."
TV networks say the Yes side isn't conceding yet, in part because results are sparse from a riding in the northern Laurentians that had voted massively for the PQ a year earlier.
On a CBC panel, Parisella bristles when told his No side is also a loser because it squandered a significant early lead. "A victory is a victory," Parisella says. "It may be a victory but you've lost," political scientist Alain Gagnon retorts.
ACT 4 (10:20): NO BY A WHISKER
TV networks declare a victor: it's a No.
With 96.4 per cent of votes counted, it's No, 50.38; Yes, 49.62.
A huge roar goes up at Metropolis, as Radio-Canada's Derome declares: "A majority of Quebecers for the second time in 15 years reject the idea that Quebec become a sovereign country and choose that Quebec stays in Canada. ... It's a narrow victory, but a victory nonetheless."
"We only really knew when Bernard Derome said the No side had won, it was that close," says Charest, who then made his way to Metropolis to speak to the partying crowd. At Yes HQ, it's silence. Sullenly, sovereignists look up at big screens, some holding their heads in grief, others hugging and sobbing, their dream shattered.
"It was devastating," Lapointe recalled. "It was as if your blood had turned to ice. It was like being hit with a sledgehammer. His (Parizeau's) dream had turned to dust."
In Parizeau's suite, only five people are supposed to remain to prepare before the premier's concession speech - Parizeau, Lapointe, Lisee, Royer and a bodyguard - but a stream of people comes in to commiserate.
Lisee said he tried to discuss "the tone" Parizeau should take, encouraging him to be "generous" in his speech.
"We were having a hard time because Mr. Parizeau didn't want to talk about this. (Instead), he was venting frustration, his disappointment, everything that he had done, all the sacrifices he had to go through during his life.
"This was a momentous event, we went from 40-per-cent Yes in 1980 to almost 50 ... (Parizeau) had always put the idea of independence above his ego (but) on that night, he was really centered on the damage (the loss) was causing him."
Parizeau indicated he "was going to be blunt" in his speech, but Lisee said he didn't know what that meant. Lisee offered to write a concession speech and Parizeau accepted.
EPILOGUE: UGLY ENDING After a winner is declared, fights break out near Metropolis, as supporters of the two sides spill out of their respective headquarters, which are less than a kilometre apart. There is pushing and shoving, storefront windows are broken, groups yell "Quebec!" and "Canada!" at one another.
But police - 450 of them in uniform and undercover and in a helicopter overhead - keep order. By the end of the night, five officers are injured and 39 people are arrested on charges including mischief, possession of homemade firebombs and illegal assembly. The Vaudreuil riding office of provincial Liberal leader Daniel Johnson is torched.
Animosity also remains within the two camps.
That night, Parizeau and Lucien Bouchard, whose personalities, styles and strategies clashed, had watched the results in separate Palais des congres suites and only spoke once - briefly and by phone, after the final result was known.
After a conciliatory speech by Bouchard, Parizeau takes the stage at 11:15 p.m. but never takes the prepared speech out of his pocket. He thanks his troops and says the Yes side will live to fight again.
But instead of rallying all Quebecers, he bitterly blames "money and ethnic votes" for the sovereignist defeat. The speech would haunt him for the rest of his days.
On the No side, during Charest's speech, TV networks switch to Chretien's address to the nation. "I walk offthe stage and my wife, Michele, tells me, 'That was a pretty good speech - too bad no one caught it." Some saw it as a deliberate attempt by federal Liberals to divert attention from political rival Charest, who had impressed voters with his passionate No speeches, passport in hand.
Chretien arrives at Parliament Hill in a dark blue sedan. A cheering, flag-waving crowd awaits him. But the prime minister is shaken and shows it in his televised address, just before midnight. "I was caught by surprise" by the high number of Yes votes, he later admits.
Proceedings would eventually be launched against people involved in both the Oct. 27, 1995, unity rally (cheap bus and airline tickets and other costs were not factored into No side spending limits) and the rejection of a disproportionately high number of ballots in some No ridings, but they were later dropped.
All but 329,500 of eligible voters cast ballots on Oct. 30, 1995. At 93.5 per cent, it was the highest voter turnout in Quebec history. No: 2,362,648. Yes: 2,308,360. (Or 50.58 per cent to 49.42 per cent). Margin of victory: 54,288 votes. ariga@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/andyriga Sources: Montreal Gazette archives La Presse archives CBC live referendum night coverage Radio-Canada live referendum night coverage: Breaking Point, CBC documentary The Morning After, Chantal Hebert The Night Canada Stood Still, RobertWright Referendum investigations, ElectionsQuebec
Credit: ANDY RIGA; Montreal Gazette
Illustration GORDON BECK, MONTREAL GAZETTE / On Oct. 30, 1995, at the end of a long night during which it seemed either side could win, Bloc Quebecois leader Lucien Bouchard consoles his wife, Audrey Best, after the Yes side is defeated.FILES; / Jean Charest; / Jean-Francois Lisee; JOHN MAHONEY, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILES / On Oct. 30, 1995, voters line up at Lachine High School before polls open to cast their ballots.; DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILE PHOTO / A couple of Oui signs are visible at the unity rally in Place du Canada on Oct. 27, 1995. The Yes side picked up momentum ahead of the referendum, polling at 50-per-cent support compared to 40 per cent at the start of the four-week campaign.; PETER MARTIN, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILES / On Oct. 24, 1995, prime minister Jean Chretien tries to drum up support for federalism at a No rally at the Verdun Auditorium. Chretien was shaken by how close the referendum vote ended up, admitting later that he was "caught by surprise."; PETER MARTIN, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILES / Provincial Liberal leader Daniel Johnson, left, and federal Progressive Conservative leader Jean Charest acknowledge a cheering crowd after a No victory.; ALLEN MCINNIS, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILES / For the Yes camp that had joyfully gathered at the Palais des congres, the long-awaited final count was heartbreaking.; GORDON BECK, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILES / "Money and the ethnic vote." Parti Quebecois Premier Jacques Parizeau's infamous referendum night concession speech would haunt him till the end of his days.; MARCOS TOWNSEND, MONTREAL GAZETTE FILES / After the close decision came down at 10:20 p.m. on referendum night, demonstrators from opposing camps clashed on Ste-Catherine St.

