Last spring, when Montreal was the epicentre of the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, Quebec resisted making masks mandatory in public places, even as face coverings became a preventive measure implemented widely around the world. Dr. Horacio Arruda, Quebec's director of public health, offered every excuse in the book for why he didn't think they were necessary. People would put them on wrong. It would offer a false sense of security. He preferred convincing people to wear them rather than forcing them.
By summer, however, after the city of Montreal, transit agencies and most businesses had already decided to make them a requirement, the Quebec government finally came around. Lo and behold, the number of new COVID-19 cases ebbed. And despite a modest resurgence in late July, the coronavirus has remained mostly manageable, despite a loosening of social restrictions.
You'd think the government might have learned a thing or two from this experience. Delaying more stringent regulations for fear of offending a vocal minority that doesn't like to be told what to do failed to produce a significant backlash. And waiting so long to introduce more serious measures may have hampered efforts to flatten the curve of transmission in Quebec earlier. But here we are, facing the same hesitancy all over again with digital contact tracing. SEE HANES ON A2 Quebec has opted out of deploying the app developed by the federal government, which will use smartphone data to anonymously monitor the movements of participants newly diagnosed with COVID-19 and automatically alert anyone who might have been exposed. Plus, Quebec announced Tuesday that it will not proceed with the rollout of its own app after parliamentary hearings on the matter over the summer.
Éric Caire, the junior minister in charge of digital transformation, said the province will nevertheless test a made-in-Quebec alert system "just in case" a second wave hits and the government decides it might come in handy after all.
The usual antagonisms with Ottawa feel especially tiresome in the midst of a pandemic. Quebec has zero credibility insisting its way of doing things is superior, given its questionable handling of the crisis early on. And Caire's lackadaisical approach is just baffling.
Citing the results of a poll conducted on the use of digital contact tracing, he said twothirds of respondents were in favour of harnessing technology to fight COVID-19. Meanwhile, 77 per cent of Quebecers surveyed believe an app would prove useful, and 75 per cent would likely install it. But, nah, never mind.
At best, this makes no sense. At worst, the government's actions are sharply at odds with its message.
Sitting at a safe distance from Caire in Montreal, Health Minister Christian Dubé went on at length about the need for vigilance in the coming weeks as kids go back to school and officials monitor the situation closely for signs of a second wave.
He thanked Quebecers for their sacrifices during confinement and their caution during the reopening. With an average of 80 new diagnoses a day, Quebec's current ratio of 10 cases per million population is among the best in the world.
"We succeeded in flattening the curve and we need to keep it flat," said Dubé. "If we manage to keep transmission to less than 20 cases per million, we can continue to live life the way we're living."
Great! But then, why is the government actively thwarting those efforts? On top of the apathy toward contact tracing, Quebec Education Minister Jean-François Roberge was cracking down on private schools planning to make masks mandatory in the classroom. Last week, he warned the Lester B. Pearson School Board against any requirements exceeding the universal ones set out by the government. Only children in Grade 5 and up must wear masks, and only in the hallways or on the school bus; they're not supposed to be obligatory during classes.
Quebec should be using every means at its disposal to keep COVID-19 in check at this sensitive time. Instead, it is throwing caution to the wind while urging the public to be prudent.
The ministers kept using containment of a fire as a metaphor to describe Quebec's strategy for keeping the pandemic under control.
We're not going to let COVID-19 cases flare in schools, said Arruda.
The wind can quickly fan the flames of a brush fire into a fullblown forest fire, Dubé warned.
We don't need to get out the water bombers to put out a brush fire, Caire shrugged.
But, frankly, the Quebec government is playing with fire in all the mixed messages and missed opportunities. ahanes@postmedia.com

