In light of Montreal's sustained frigid weather, the question of how to heat homes most efficiently is a pertinent one these days. By far, the best known way to minimize heating needs is to maximize the quality of a home's envelope - including its insulation and windows. Heat pumps can also increase heating efficiency and lower an overall heating bill. They also cool homes in the summer.
Heat pumps absorb heat from one area and release it to another one.
In the winter, the systems extract heat from either the air surrounding a house, even in sub-zero temperatures, or from beneath the earth's surface, and then bring that heat into a home. Residential heat pumps are electricity powered, and require a backup heating system - which can include gas, oil or electrical systems.
Heat pump performance varies depending on the type, a system's design and installation, maintenance, as well as various aspects of the residence in question - most notably, the quality of the building envelope.
Denis Tanguay works in the field of geothermal energy, and is well-versed on the benefits of geothermal heating - that is, using heat pumps to pull heat from the ground.
While Tanguay and others agree these ground-source heat pumps are the most efficient type of heat pump, Tanguay uses a mini-split heat pump: a system that draws heat from exterior air.
In his 1910 house on the Plateau, Tanguay didn't want to install the ducting required for a geothermal system. He also didn't have room for the fridge-sized compressor ground-source heating requires.
In 2013, Tanguay had a Fujitsu mini-split heat pump installed. The compressor is about the size of a large suitcase, and is mounted on an exterior wall. A small hole was made in the wall, and piping about one-inch thick runs to two interior units - one is wall-mounted on the first floor of the open-concept home, and one is mounted upstairs.
The two units blow warm air, but Tanguay said, "It's not aggressive."
"It's smooth, so you feel the heat, and you don't feel any draft," he said.
Tanguay said he likes that the mini-split system is quiet, compact and does both heating and cooling.
It significantly reduces his use of electric baseboard heating, he said. To maintain his system, Tanguay cleans the back of the compressor in the fall with a garden hose, and cleans the plastic filters in his interior units once or twice a year. The mini-split is not efficient when it's very cold, as with other air-to-air heat pumps. Tanguay said his electric baseboards kick in when the temperature is -25C.
He noted his overall hydro costs have not changed since his system was installed, however, Tanguay also now has a cooling system in the summer, which he did not have prior to installation.
Including installation, a minisplit setup may cost about $8,000. "Just in the last five to seven years (mini-splits) were invented, and they're revolutionizing the housing market," said Andre Fauteux, editor of La Maison du 21e siecle, a magazine about ecological housing.
Meanwhile, central heat pumps, which are also air-to-air systems, have existed for decades. The central heat pump unit is about the size of a small dishwasher, and sits outside a home. Warm air travels from here through ducts, throughout the home. Efficiency in extreme temperatures have improved over time with this type of pump. "New inverter types have new electronics that have increased the efficiency of heat pumps below -10 and -15. They can (now) be efficient to -25," Fauteux said.
Below that point, the backup system - usually oil or gas - will kick in. Fauteux notes Montrealers who have dual-energy like this may want to also install a Montreal-invented tri-energy system, which can save them money. The 3-Flex system from ABC Hybrid Energy, he said, prevents oil or gas from kicking in too early, which means homeowners benefit more from off-peak electricity rates, and reduce their climate impact. A central heat pump system may cost $15,000 to install, Fauteux said, depending on the size of a house and the house's heat losses. If someone doesn't already have ducts throughout their home, installing a central heat pump will cost much more, he noted.
Homeowners usually see a 25-or 30-per-cent reduction in heating costs with a central heat pump system, Fauteux said, if it's properly installed and maintained. However, central heat pumps, he said, usually break down after 15 years.
Geothermal, or ground-source, heat pumps collect heat using water in subterranean pipes. That heat is transferred to either air or water that is piped into the home. Tanguay, who is president of the Canadian GeoExchange Coalition, said these systems reduce homeowners' energy bills by an average of 40-50 per cent.
For Marc Belanger, however, assessing the life cycle cost of any system should be more important than assessing year-to-year payback.
He's the director of geothermal systems for Master Group and, in 2012, had two geothermal heat pumps systems installed in his 2,500-square-foot home in Ile-Bizard. He expects his system to last 20 to 25 years, and the infrastructure in the earth will be there as long as the house is, he said.
Belanger's home was built to Quebec's Novoclimat standard, he said. "We made sure the building envelope was as efficient as possible," said Belanger, and so the energy demands are also as low as possible.
"Comfort is probably the No. 1 criteria," he said. After having vertical drilling done on his property, water now travels within closed loop piping down these narrow wells to collect the Earth's heat. Belanger's home has two separate heat pump systems: a water-towater system provides radiant floor heating in his basement and garage; and a water-to-air system that sends warm air through ducts to his basement, ground floor and upper floor. The home also has four thermostats, so areas not being used will not have energy demands.
For maintenance, Belanger has to change filters in his water-to-air unit. Each unit is in his mechanical room. And extreme temperatures do not impact his system's efficiency, he said.
Pricing for a geothermal system can be $20,000 to $35,000, including installation.
"It's really important to get your installation done by a professional who's certified, and get your installation certified also," said Fauteux, who noted there are a lot of problematic geothermal installations. "I recommend dealing with people who have been (installing geothermal) for 15 years or more."
Fauteux also recommended Quebec's Renoclimat (renoclimat. qc.ca) program for any homeowner looking at reducing energy needs. For $150, a specialist will do a thorough energy audit and recommend the best investments to reduce a homeowner's heating costs. If you apply what they recommend, Fauteux said, a second audit is free, and the fixes made will be subsidized.
Credit: JOANNE PENHALE; Special To The Montreal Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Denis Tanguay's Fujitsu mini-split heat pump is mounted on the back wall of his Montreal home.; PHOTOS: DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Mini-splits are making waves in the property world because they are simple to install, easy to maintain.; PHOTOS: DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Mini-splits can work in conjunction with an existing heating system (electric, or oil or gas furnace) and are durable.; PHOTOS: DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Marc Belanger has two geothermal heat pumps for his 2,500-square-foot home in Ile Bizard. The pump that heats the forced-air heating system is at the left and the smaller pump provides hot water to the radiant floor-heating system.

