As Montreal surrendered to a March blizzard, some hardy souls braved the elements to raise funds for the city's homeless.
Volunteers couldn't have picked a better - or worse - time than this week to raise awareness about the challenges faced by those who eat and sleep with one eye open on the streets.
Started at the University of Alberta in 2005 and now observed at more than 20 universities across Canada, Montreal's 5 Days for the Homeless ends on Friday.
Some volunteers spend one night on the street, while others - like Seymour Ward - jump in for the long haul.
Ward signed up for a Mondayto-Friday shift, even if the howling winds that whipped past the corner of Mackay St. and de Maisonneuve Blvd., where she and a few others hunkered down under blankets, made it feel like minus 18 C.
"It's wind burn," she cheerfully said of her apple-red cheeks.
Toughing it out in frigid weather gives volunteers street cred, and Ward said the public's response to the initiative has been positive.
"Usually we get a good response, especially when the weather is like this," the Concordia University finance grad explained.
Money was being collected in plastic bottles from passersby outside the university's Hall Building, and all funds will be donated to local organizations and shelters that help the homeless, including Dans La Rue and Chez Doris.
Ward was well-prepared for the harsh weather, donning six layers of clothing under her army-grade coat.
"It's really about keeping your hands and feet warm and dry," she offered as advice. Ward became involved in the initiative seven years ago through her friendship with Josh Redler, a Concordia student at the time, who kick-started the movement here in 2008.
"What this does, as Josh likes to say, is this turns sympathy into empathy," Ward said.
"So you actually really have an idea what (the homeless) go through."
Ward enjoys getting to know local homeless people, whom she says seem to approve of the initiative.
"They're very supportive. In the years I've done it, I've never had a negative reaction," she said.
Ward was joined by Elias Lolei, another former Concordia student who first got involved some five years ago.
"My plan was to come during the day, just for that day, then go back home," he said.
"But when I saw the energy and how passionate people were, I bought a sleeping bag and that was it."
While eating and sleeping outdoors helps create awareness about homelessness, Lolei said, days are much lonelier than nights on the street.
"It's lonely when there are a million people around you and they ignore you. That's the hardest part - being ignored."
Cecile Arbaud, executive director for Dans La Rue, said the organization is grateful for the support of 5 Days for the Homeless Montreal.
"We're always touched when young people choose to give back in support of other young people who are living a very different reality," Arbaud said.
A homeless man who was panhandling during the storm said he was grateful for the support.
"It's a good idea. It helps," he said. "But to stay warm, you have to keep moving." jmeagher@postmedia.com
Credit: JOHN MEAGHER; The Gazette
Illustration CHRISTINNE MUSCHI / Volunteer Seymour Ward sits outside Concordia University during 5 Days for the Homeless. The initiative raises funds for people living on the streets.

