As a blizzard swept across southern Quebec Tuesday, technicians from throughout the province scrambled to restore power to more than 143,000 homes and businesses still in the dark as of 9:30 p.m.
The bulk of those Hydro-Québec clients live in Laval, Laurentian and Lanaudière regions - all of which were battered by freezing rain overnight Monday.
In Deux-Montagnes, one of the hardest-hit areas north of Montreal, people lined up outside a greasy spoon on Oka Rd. just after 8 a.m. to get their first warm meal since the power went out Monday afternoon.
"Normally we're busy like this on a Sunday, but Tuesday? This is a first," said waitress Monique Lécuyer. "They called me in at the last minute to handle this rush. We've got to turn on a dime and roll up our sleeves, I guess."
The restaurant staff hustled among construction workers, seniors and parents whose smiling children just found out they'd be missing school Tuesday.
"I saw the transformer on my street explode," said Maxime Beaudet, who stood in line outside the restaurant. "It was an explosion of blue and the power went out on our block. It's just my dogs and me at home, but we're snuggling and keeping warm."
Beaudet said it was a large tree branch, weighed down by ice, that snapped and hit the power lines, causing the explosion.
"Firefighters were already at the scene, trying to clear the lines," he said.
There were more than 800 service interruptions across the province Tuesday afternoon. That means crews had to be deployed to hundreds of sites, where they would evaluate the damage and begin their repairs.
Additional technicians came into the Montreal area from Sherbrooke and the state of Vermont, according to Hydro-Québec.
Across the island of Laval, police went door to door checking to make sure families were safe Tuesday, particularly in areas hardest hit by the outages: Auteuil, Fabreville and Duvernay.
There have been two cases of carbon monoxide poisoning since the ice storm began. In one, a family of four was hospitalized after using a propane-fuelled barbecue to warm their home. The other involved only one person.
Firefighters reported high levels of carbon monoxide inside both homes. Neither case was life-threatening, according to Urgences Santé.
Families crowded into the Carrefour Laval mall early Tuesday to drink hot coffee and get out of their cold homes. Some children sat with their smartphones plugged into electrical outlets, logging onto social media to catch up on the latest news and gossip. "It's better than being in class," said one highschool student from Chomedey.
Outside, a thick coat of ice bent trees and weighed down electrical wires. Busy intersections were left without functioning traffic lights, visibility was blotted out by snow and traffic slowed to a crawl along both sides of Highway 440. The storm also stalled mail delivery in and around Montreal.
Quebec's Public Security Minister, Geneviève Guilbault, said Tuesday she would be monitoring the situation closely.
Laval Mayor Marc Demers urged residents to check in with their neighbours, particularly older residents and those less able to deal with the outages.
Hydro-Québec officials said Tuesday morning they hoped to have power re-established to most clients by the end of the day. The efforts of repair crews were complicated by the damage done to the power grid by fallen trees and fallen wires coated in ice by freezing rain.
"We recorded 10 to 15 millimetres of freezing rain in some areas along with high winds," said Hydro-Québec spokesperson Louis-Olivier Batty, adding that the weather system that caused the damage cut a swath from the lower Laurentians to north of Montreal. "That corridor saw a lot of trees and branches fall on the (power distribution) network."
The Commission scolaire de Laval, Commission scolaire des Affluents, Commission scolaire de la Seigneurie-des-Mille-Îles and the Sir Wilfrid Laurier School Board closed all of their schools on Tuesday.
Meanwhile, the city of Laval announced it had opened two community centres for residents without power in need of warming up or a shower. The centres are: the Centre Communautaire Accès at 6500 Arthur Sauveé Blvd. in Laval-Ouest and the Centre Communautaire de Lausanne at 455 Lausanne St. in Vimont.
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS;The Gazette

