Re: "Quebec's flooding plan is misguided: hydrologist" (Montreal Gazette, July 26) and "Is the climate crisis solution in your backyard?" (Allison Hanes, July 23) The threat of periodic flooding along our riverbanks poses many problems.
Claude Marche, an engineer, offers one solution: He wants Quebec to support rebuilding in flood zones with the help of flood-proof construction techniques. That might be good for homeowners who have been flooded but maybe not so good for other taxpayers and certainly not good for the environment.
What the rivers need - what they had before reckless human interference - is abundant wetlands along their banks. These wetlands serve as natural sponges, absorbing excess runoff when it occurs. Such wetlands also provide vital habitat for threatened species and help clean pollutants from waters flowing into our rivers.
Instead of protecting only buildings, we need to protect and restore wetlands to create a livable environment for ourselves and other species.
The recent spike in flooding is due partly to climate change but is also facilitated by deforestation in the headwaters of the Ottawa River.
Old-growth forests were logged out in the 19th century, and secondary forests still provide huge quantities of lumber, plus pulp and paper, for export. Where forests are cleared, snow and rain become surface runoff, building to floods downstream. The roots of living forests instead help the soil hold more water.
Societies living off the unsustainable destruction of their natural capital will not flourish for long. We don't need better construction in our wetlands; we need more wetlands. Forests and wetlands must be protected and restored. Then we'll have healthy river systems, and periodic flooding will abate even in the face of climate change.
In fact, reforestation could help save us from global warming. As Allison Hanes reports, researchers at a Swiss university calculate that "increasing the planet's tree canopy by 25 per cent ... could eventually absorb as much as two-thirds of the carbon that has been spewed into the atmosphere since the start of the Industrial Revolution."
Various industrial systems for pulling carbon out of the atmosphere have been suggested, but none has yet proven economical on a large scale, and any such system must consume energy that will primarily derive from fossil fuels, at least in the near future. A massive expansion of forests would give us massive sequestration of carbon in a process powered by photosynthesis.
Much of this continent was once covered in forests, and we need to take steps back in that direction. We need to ally ourselves with Mother Nature, not continue fighting against her.
Donald Attwood
Hudson
CREDIT: DONALD ATTWOOD;The Gazette

