For some families, especially the 155,000 households left in the dark Sunday, the first ice storm of the new year may have stirred up memories of the storm of 1998.
But the most recent storm pales in comparison to the '98 disaster that caused havoc across Eastern Canada.
Sunday's storm heaped 10 centimetres of snow followed by freezing rain on the greater Montreal area. High winds and ice felled trees, turned sidewalks into skating rinks and - at the storm's peak - left 155,000 Hydro-Quebec customers without electricity. By 5 p.m. Monday, Hydro-Quebec reported that 2,500 households across the province were still without power.
In contrast, the ice storm of '98 - still the harshest on record in Quebec - battered the south of the province with 30-to-40 millimetres of freezing rain, and ripped the branches offor toppled an estimated 16,000 trees in Montreal alone. "During the 1998 ice storm, high-voltage transmission lines and towers fell like dominoes under the weight of the freezing rain," Hydro-Quebec spokesman Mathieu Rouy said. "At the height of the storm, more than one million homes were without power and it took several weeks to restore power to all the homes affected."
Hydro-Quebec has said it made a number of improvements to its power grid to avoid a repeat of the '98 disaster.
Every 10th tower on a transmission line has been bolstered to withstand violent winds and heavy ice, and Hydro-Quebec has rejigged its transmission system to deliver electricity by different routes, Rouy said.
Although some have argued Hydro-Quebec should bury more power lines to protect them from harsh weather, Rouy said that would be too costly since some hydroelectric complexes are more than a thousand kilometres away from customers. "I can't give you a precise number, but it can be three times, or even 10 times the cost or more," he said.
This weekend's ice storm wasn't nearly as severe as in 1998.
A spokeswoman for the Insurance Bureau of Canada said the association didn't expect an uptick in the number of housing or car insurance claims because of the storm. In 1998, however, the ice storm caused $1.3 billion in damage ($1.9 billion in today's dollars), the IBC reported.
Andre Cantin of Environment Canada said Sunday's storm doesn't even qualify as exceptional. "We don't have a classification scheme, but from the point of view of other storms I'd say (Sunday's) was moderately problematic."
As for the '98 storm, Cantin said he had never seen anything like it in his 31 years as a meteorologist - and doesn't expect to again.
Over those chaotic few days between Jan. 4 and 10, 1998, he worked 15-hour shifts in a provincial government office in Quebec City, relaying the latest forecasts up a chain to top brass. "Even the premier participated in the conference calls. It was an event that was managed at the very highest level," Cantin recalled.
"It was a little stressful, but motivating for a meteorologist like me to work and provide information in a situation that was so dramatic," he said, "because there were people who were suffering and who were subsequently traumatized. As soon as we speak of an ice storm now, these people remember." gvendeville@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/geoffvendeville
Credit: GEOFFREY VENDEVILLE; The Gazette
Illustration DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / High-voltage transmission lines and towers fell like dominoes during the 1998 ice storm, affecting more than a million homes. By contrast, Sunday's storm left 155,000 households in the dark, with about 2,500 still without power by Monday evening.

