"Everything moves real slow when it's 40 below ..." - Sam Roberts, The Canadian Dream
The online world was captivated last week by a dramatic image out of Montreal. A snowy owl swooping through the sky was captured on Jan. 3 by a CCTV camera located at the intersection of Highway 40 and Sources Blvd., in the West Island. Quebec Transport Minister Robert Poeti took to Twitter and Facebook on Thursday to share the images of the majestic creature, soaring high with wings aloft.
This carnivorous hunter - which happens to be the official bird of Quebec - comes at the viewer in a series of slow-motion images as it looks for a place to perch.
The backdrop: a frozen, stark, urban landscape with empty black highways and strip malls. It makes for a stunning visual. The photos have since gone viral online and been shared millions of times all around the globe.
Winter warriors of Montreal: behold your standard bearer.
You know who you are. Those of you who brave the elements every year when the mercury dips below zero, who are out cross-country skiing every morning or biking to work against the Arctic winds when blizzards sweep through the city. All you folks who go winter camping and ice fishing on the weekends, and play hockey on the outdoor rinks until late into the night, frostbite be damned! My heroes. I salute you.
Just so that we're clear, I love getting out in the winter as much as the next person. I enjoy the activities it has to offer. I will happily suit up in my long johns and parka to go sledding with my kids on Mount Royal or skating on the pond at Parc St-Viateur. I love breaking out the snowshoes to get out to our log cabin in the Laurentians. But if I'm honest, most of the time my impulse during these cold months is to cocoon indoors. One of my favourite snowstorm pursuits is to climb under a stack of heavy blankets and read novels by candlelight while listening to ice pellets lash against the windowpane. I read until my eyes are heavy. When I can't keep them open any longer, I give myself permission to doze offcontentedly. Bliss. I mean, honestly. Who wants to go outside in that kind of weather? When the temperature drops and the snow is piling up outside, I am of the firm belief that there is nothing better than battening down the hatches and gathering around a crackling fire with friends. (Consider this my lament for Montreal's persecuted wood burning fireplaces.) A pot of tea and the physical weight of a good book are my mid-winter anchors.
(By the way, the Danish - who experience the same kind of long, dark winters we have here in Canada - have a great word for the feeling I've just described: Hygge, pronounced "hoo-ga." Apparently, there is no direct English translation, but I'm told it translates loosely as feeling cozy, cared for and being part of a warm social atmosphere. Some have even suggested that hygge is an etymological relative of the word "hug" in English. How great is that?) Anyhow, maybe it's my penchant for wanting to stay inside and cozy during the winter that explains why I'm so charmed by Montreal's snowy owl and the attention it's getting all over the world. More than one online viewer of the images suggested that they looked like a scene from one of J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter novels. Magical. Otherworldly.
But Montrealers who take Quebec author and songwriter Gilles Vigneault's celebrated lyrics to heart ("mon pays ce n'est pas un pays, c'est l'hiver!"/My country is not a country, it is winter) might also see this snowy owl as a spontaneous reminder of the whimsy and wildness that thrive here in our own northern place.
celine.cooper@gmail.com Twitter: CooperCeline
Credit: CELINE COOPER; The Gazette
Illustration THE CANADIAN PRESS / A traffic camera at Highway 40 and Sources Blvd. in the West Island caught a snowy owl flying toward it. After Quebec Transport Minister Robert Poeti released images of the owl Thursday on social media, they went viral.

