Montreal's future ozonation waste water treatment plant that was promised to be up and running this year and cost $285 million is now at least two years behind schedule, and city officials cannot confirm if the initial price estimate will be met.
The ozonation complex being built to remove bacteria, viruses and pharmacological toxins from the city's waste water before it's flushed into the St. Lawrence River will be the largest in the world.
When that will start happening, however, and how much it will actually cost is still very much up in the air. City officials are now saying they plan to put out calls for tender in the coming months, looking for companies to bid on the construction of the plant.
Sylvain Ouellet, the city's executive committee member responsible for water and water infrastructure who inherited the project after the November municipal elections, said Thursday the plant will not be operational until at least 2020 or 2021, which would put it three years behind schedule. He could not comment on whether price estimates remain the same, he said, for fear of tainting the bidding process.
"Once the call for tenders is completed, the construction phase will speed up considerably," he said.
He noted, however, that calls for tender sometimes fail because of a lack of bids that conform to standards and price expectations, causing further delays.
Experts have created detailed three-dimensional models to ensure there will be no surprises, Ouellet said, and to ensure they get the best price. As part of the contract, the city is also calling for bidders to operate the plant for the first few years, when defects are most likely to present themselves, and to assume unforeseen costs, he said.
"The project is following its course," city spokesperson Gabrielle Fontaine-Giroux wrote in an email in response to queries from the Montreal Gazette. "A contract was given for the supply of equipment in 2016 and for an electric plant in 2017. The call for tenders for construction will be launched in 2018," she said. ESTIMATE OF COSTS "Because the estimate of costs of construction will be used in that process, it cannot be communicated before the public launch of the call for tenders, (nor can we) announce the opening date of the new factory, or the total cost of the project."
The administration of former mayor Denis Coderre announced in early 2015 it would build the ozonation centre at the J.R.-Marcotte sewage treatment plant on the eastern edge of the island by 2018. The cost was estimated at $285 million, with 85 per cent of the bill being covered by the provincial and federal governments.
That year, the city awarded a $99-million contract to build an ozonation plant to create ozone gas to French firm Dégremont Ltée. That firm gave the only bid deemed suitable out of two submitted, after a tendering process that took four years. Dégremont's bid was also 40 per cent higher than the city's estimates. City officials said the variation arose because it had no projects of a similar scale on which it could base cost projections. Several elements of the Dégremont contract have yet to be fulfilled.
The city said it planned to launch a call for tenders in 2016 for the construction of buildings needed for ozonation, and another for the production of oxygen necessary in the process, Le Devoir reported at the time. The call for tenders for the construction of buildings is only being done this year. Montreal's waste water treatment plant, one of the largest in the world, handles the water from the city's homes, storm drains and snow-collection dumps. It filters out solids, which are incinerated, but it does little to extricate the bacteria that comes mainly from human excrement, as well as the pharmacological toxins harmful to aquatic life. Swimming is not recommended for kilometres downstream of Montreal.
Ozonation, in which ozone gas is injected into the water to destroy bacteria, viruses and pharmacological toxins, has been found to kill 95 per cent of bacteria, the majority of viruses and 75 per cent of pharmacological and cosmeticbased pathogens, city officials say.
Proponents argue the technology was chosen in 2008 after years of study by independent experts. They say the ozonation centre represents the best environmental news in the waste-water sphere in 30 years, which was when the J.R.-Marcotte treatment plant was inaugurated and Montreal stopped dumping its raw sewage into the St. Lawrence.
Critics counter that ozonation has not been used on this vast a scale for a reason - because it has been shown not to work in large urban settings - and that Montreal is being foolhardy by risking so much money on an untested technology. The time delays prove their point, they say.
"It's taxpayers'money, and this has been going on forever," said Ronald Gehr, an assistant professor at McGill University with 25 years of experience in waste water treatment who has been cautioning against the ozone factory since 2008.
He was barred from doing research at the J.R.-Marcotte plant over his public statements after years of collaboration there, he said. Initial cost estimates for the ozonation plant given in 2005 were $200 million, he noted, and subsequently rose by 40 per cent.
"I feel they're being cagey, and I wonder what they have to hide," he said.
rbruemmer@postmedia.com twitter.com/renebruemmer
CREDIT: RENÉ BRUEMMER;The Gazette

