Sprinklers, sticky Popsicles and community pools - these are some of the things that come to mind when I recall my childhood summers. Growing up mostly without AC, we'd bear the summer heat while staying hydrated as best as we could.
In the days long before splash pads, a sprinkler was enough to entertain us for hours at a time. We'd run through it shrieking with excitement. If we wanted to be particularly festive, we might even rip up a garbage bag to slide on with water from the hose. Yes, the slip and slide existed back then, but was a frivolous purchase when garbage bags could suffice.
Adult life, however, brings greater responsibilities. As a member of what has come to be called the sandwich generation, I have found myself in a sticky predicament during the recent heat wave. I have been concerned about my elderly father's health and well-being without proper air conditioning and about my children staying hydrated and not being overly exposed to the heat. We have opened our air-conditioned home up to friends and family needing a place to cool down over the past week and have tried calling relatives to make sure they are taken care of.
It's been more critical than ever before to reach out to our loved ones to make sure they are safe, cool and hydrated during the intense heat that as of Thursday, had cost 33 lives across Quebec. While Friday promises a return to normal seasonal temperatures, chances are that we'll suffer at least one more heat wave before the end of the summer.
This time around, I have been impressed with the city of Montreal's proactive response; it should become standard practice. Opening up municipal buildings, extending pool and splash pad hours and even setting up city sprinklers for residents to cool off at have been excellent initiatives.
Even so, some people may not know about local community efforts, or may not avail themselves of them for any number of reasons. Those who are isolated, experiencing health problems, mentally unstable or lonely may not consider forcing themselves out of their homes to escape the heat. That's why outreach to our friends and neighbours, as Mayor Valérie Plante urged, is so important.
Another municipal official who made the right call was Pierrefonds-Roxboro Borough Mayor Jim Beis. When Beis announced he would be cancelling the Canada Day parade out of concern for the well-being of participants, he drew the ire of some residents. They complained that city officials were overly cautious and that if they merely gave out water, we should be OK to proceed. However, the sweltering weather on Canada Day proved that the city had in fact, made the right call in cancelling a parade that would have had volunteers and entertainers walk the four-kilometre course in heavy non-breathable costumes.
This is not a whole lot different than a severe cold snap. Any form of severe weather can be deadly. As for how to deal with stubborn family members who insist they are OK without air conditioning: Taking them to the movies, inviting them over for a meal or just taking them to the mall are great excuses to make sure everyone stays safe. When the temperature soars, we all need to play a role in reaching out to our friends and family. Generally speaking, people don't want to impose. Sometimes merely posting on social media for family and friends to reach out if they don't have air conditioning can go a long way.
So when there's a heat wave, continue sipping on the slushy drinks, but be sure to check in to make sure your loved ones are safe, as if their lives depended on it. Because they do. Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed is the founder and editor in chief of CanadianMomEh.com, a lifestyle blog. twitter.com/canadianmomeh
CREDIT: FARIHA NAQVI-MOHAMED;The Gazette

