In the spring of 1997, the Red River Flood hit. It was truly
the flood of the century.
It was a terrible disaster, the worst to hit the people of Manitoba
since the early 1800s.
Three people were killed. Half a million acres were flooded. Nearly
30,000 Manitobans were evacuated from their homes and damage costs
reached close to $1 billion.
The flood was massive and officials were clearly overwhelmed. To
cope, Manitoba's government called in the armed forces, the RCMP and
the Department of National Defence.
Now, at the time, I was three provinces away, in B.C. I had made
the foolhardy decision to run as the Liberal Party candidate in
North Vancouver where I lived. The Grits hadn't won the riding in a
generation, and the Reform Party MP had money and incumbency on his
side. But I figured that with a solid national campaign and a lot of
luck I might eke out a win.
Calling an election during the midst of the Manitoba flood was a
mistake, I felt, but it wasn't my decision to make. So the campaign
kicked off.
One sunny day, I approached a door in a North Van apartment
building. Behind it, my clipboard told me, was an elderly couple,
longtime Liberal voters. I knocked. A kindly older woman answered
the door. Before I could make my pitch, this is what happened.
"I know who you are, dear. You don't have tell me," she said,
smiling sweetly. "And we think you and Mr. Chretien should be
ashamed of yourselves, calling an election while the poor people of
Manitoba deal with that flood. Do I make myself clear?"
"Yes, ma'am," I croaked.
"Good," she said, and closed the door. And that was precisely the
moment I knew I'd get my keester kicked, beaten decisively by a
Reform Party candidate the Canadian Press called an "elf."
Beaten by an elf. That unpleasant (but educational) doorstop
encounter came back to me recently in the sad aftermath of Elliot
Lake mall collapse.
Everyone in Canada knows about the catastrophe that has been
unfolding in Elliot Lake, midway between Sault Ste. Marie and
Sudbury, in Ontario's North. It has been a terrible, terrible
tragedy. People have died, and many have been hurt.
Unfortunately, some in the media and in the political opposition
have been looking for someone to blame in Elliot Lake. They've
suggested Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty and Prime Minister Stephen
Harper should have hustled up there right away. To do what? We know
not. But McGuinty and Harper have been lambasted by some for not
travelling to Elliot Lake.
Jean Chretien, as I recall, travelled to Manitoba during the '97
flood. "An infamous PR disaster," the Montreal Gazette later
intoned. A "photo opportunity stunt," declared the Vancouver Sun.
"Appalling insensitivity," said the Edmonton Journal. However, in
the end, Chretien still won a majority--albeit a reduced one. Some
of his western candidates (like, um, me) certainly paid a price. But
the Liberal leader ended up with more seats in Manitoba than any
other party.
The paradox, I remarked to my campaign team at the time, is this:
If you don't go to the site of a disaster, you'll get hammered for
staying away and being insensitive. And if you travel to the site of
a disaster, you'll get hammered for coming for a photo op and
therefore being insensitive. You can't win, in other words.
The best people to determine what politicians should or shouldn't
do are the people of Manitoba, or the people of Elliot Lake, or
wherever. If they say come, you come. If they say stay away, you
stay away. In situations like Elliot Lake, or Manitoba, it's the
people on the ground who are the boss. What they say counts most.
Not anyone else.
warren.kinsella@sunmedia.ca
CREDIT: WARREN KINSELLA

