AT A GLANCE Andy Kim's Fourth Annual Christmas Show, benefiting the Starlight Children's Foundation, takes place Saturday at 8 p.m. at the Corona Theatre, 2490 Notre-Dame St. W. Performers include Ron Sexsmith, Hawksley Workman, Platinum Blonde, the Sam Roberts Band, Michel Pagliaro and Danny Michel. Host is Sean Cullen. The show is sold out, but additional tickets may become available for $33, through the venue and via evenko.ca.
Before getting down to pleasantries, Andy Kim has a question: "How is the (bleep)ing weather in Montreal?" Just divine, he is told. Sun is shining. Temperature is close to 20 C. Not a trace of snow on our streets.
"Right!" Kim shoots back over the phone.
Can't fool him. Though he is now based in Toronto, Kim was born here and has spent much of his life here. He knows what kind of arctic havoc can come to this city (and has come to this city in the days since the interview).
But there is a reason behind Kim's question: he will return to his hometown for Andy Kim's Fourth Annual Christmas Show, Saturday at the Corona Theatre.
This year's concert, which benefits the Starlight Children's Foundation, once again features a who's-who of the Canadian music scene: Ron Sexsmith, Hawksley Workman, Platinum Blonde, the Sam Roberts Band, Michel Pagliaro and Danny Michel. Actor/funny fellow Sean Cullen is host.
Kim's concern over the weather relates to the musicians, who will be coming from near and far for this event. As it is, they will all be performing pro bono for the cause, so the last thing they need to contend with is a blizzard - and fortunately, there isn't one in the forecast for this weekend.
It is a measure of the respect these musicians (and others who performed at previous Christmas shows) hold for Kim that they don't hesitate to come on board for the concert. And lest some suspect they might go through the motions on stage, doing seasonal classics, that is hardly the case. They have consistently let loose and kicked butt.
"These concerts are so emotional for me," says Kim, who just did his 13th Christmas show in Toronto. "I'm a huge fan of music. I'm still the kid who grew up in Montreal, who was in awe of musicians back then, and I'm still in awe now.
"When Sam (Roberts) wrote me a note to say he was going to bring his whole band with him, I was totally blown away. I'm excited every year to know that there are artists who I will call and who will graciously show up. I don't know how this generation of musicians comes together with mine, but I'm an extremely lucky and blessed guy, because no one has ever told me they're not into this."
In addition to the artists performing Saturday, Kim has had little trouble persuading the likes of Barenaked Ladies, Martha Wainwright, Broken Social Scene, Feist, the Strumbellas, Patrick Watson, Roch Voisine, Arkells, Tom Wilson and Bobby Bazini for concerts past.
Kim sets an excellent example.
Though his songs have sold over 30 million copies (including his chart-busters Sugar, Sugar and Rock Me Gently), he has been inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and Canadian Music Hall of Fame and has won all manner of awards, he is considered to be one of the most charitable performers in the country.
"One can't help but be moved and give back when visiting a hospital with sick children or anyone who is suffering. One year we did a show for a little-known children's disease, Sanfilippo syndrome (a severe deterioration of the central nervous system). It is a heartbreaking illness: the child is normal up to the age of six, then everything in their body makes a reversal and they generally don't live past 12 or 13.
"It's all about reaching out to those in need. It's about people, and it's how I grew up in a closely knit family who really cared about the community we lived in as well as others.
"When I call the artists about doing the show, I tell them this is not a career move. I tell them they're not going to sell more records or raise their profile. I've found that artists are always there to help. It's part of their DNA. It's as simple as that."
Kim is the first to acknowledge this is not a career move for him either.
He's not complaining: he still performs sporadically, be it for regular concerts or corporate gigs. His latest disc, It's Decided, was released to solid reviews in 2015. His songs have been covered by the likes of Wilson Pickett, Tom Jones and Bob Marley, and can be heard on the series Ray Donovan and Mindhunter.
"When I'm performing, I still always marvel at the interest people have in my music," Kim says. "I've never taken anything for granted in my life.
"At the same time, I still get so excited listening to the music of others. What I love about these shows is that these are eclectic lineups of musicians who play for eclectic audiences. Someone may come for Michel Pagliaro, but they'll also discover Hawksley Workman. I really don't worry about demographics. It's all about the mix of the music."
It's all about the season, too, for Kim.
"It still remains so special," he reflects. "One of my greatest childhood memories was going to the Jean Talon Market - a block away from where we lived - to get a Christmas tree every year with my mom and kid brother. My mom would carry the bulk of the tree home, including carrying it up three flights of stairs. It was magical.
"It brings me back to times of innocence in Montreal. There is really no place like Montreal - no matter what winter throws at the city. I'll always be a Montreal boy." bbrownstein@postmedia.com twitter.com/billbrownstein
CREDIT: BILL BROWNSTEIN;The Gazette

