Fasten your seat belts and enjoy the ride. Jim Popp may be many things to many people, and few will dispute his record as a general manager. As a head coach? That, arguably, hasn't always ended as well.
So it should come as no surprise, when push comes to shove and he's backed into a corner, Popp will come out fighting, swinging wildly and defending himself - always entertaining, garrulous and, at times, bombastic. There will never be a slow news day around the Alouettes again this season. Stuck for an angle? Just ask Popp a question.
And so it begins again - for the fourth time - Thursday night at Tim Hortons Field (7:30 p.m., TSN, RDS, TSN Radio-690), when the Als meet the Hamilton Tiger-Cats. The game marks the latest instalment of Popp as head coach, the general manager stepping in for the popular and well-respected Tom Higgins, fired last Friday, less than 24 hours after Montreal's victory at British Columbia. The Als have a 3-5 record, while the Ticats are the Canadian Football League's hottest team at 6-2, riding a five-game undefeated string. Former Hamilton defensive-lineman Angelo Mosca, now suffering from Alzheimer's, will have his number retired during a halftime ceremony.
"It's never an easy situation when people are popular, whether they're winning or losing. Tom's a liked guy, no question. We're also not winning games we should be winning. Or getting results. He's done everything he can. It's not a knock at him. There were players who didn't like Don Matthews or Marc Trestman. There's always
people who aren't going to like a change. That's understandable. Get used to it. It's life," Popp said Wednesday, holding court with media members for 15 minutes, never ducking an issue while answering opinionated questions about his popularity in the room, ulterior motives and what in thunderation is going on here - a move that has widely been panned.
It's a move - perhaps impulsive reaction - that was made by owner Robert Wetenhall, after consulting with Popp. The GM claimed other options were explored, promoting from within, but this was Wetenhall's request. Popp said never once has he asked to coach when someone else was fired. It has generally been the organization's mandate to have both a GM and head coach, knowing Popp's strength is in personnel.
He replaced Rod Rust in 2001, Matthews in 2006 and Dan Hawkins in 2013. Popp coached the entire 2007 season, the Als losing 10 of 18 games, and he anticipated returning in 2014, Higgins not hired until late February. Popp's overall record, including playoffs, is 17-24, Montreal never having missed the playoffs under him or any other coach. In 2006, the team reached the Grey Cup but lost.
"Tom and I got along great, We had no problems. We worked hard together. We just didn't have as much success," Popp said. "Is there a right time or situation? I don't think there ever is. If we'd have lost in B.C., there wouldn't be near as much made about this. Or had we waited two games. If we were 2-7, everybody would have been expecting a change. It just happened to come after a win. So did Dan Hawkins.
"Sure I'm going to take heat. I'm a big boy. I didn't run Tom out of town. I don't do that to coaches. At the end of the day, if people want to give me crap, that's fine. I'm not worried about my legacy. There's been enough proven and documented," Popp continued. "All I'm concerned about is the players."
The decision to remove Higgins, of course, wasn't based exclusively on his record. Montreal's five losses have come by a combined 15 points, so the effort was there. But it was Popp, a year ago, who had JeffGarcia and Turk Schonert parachuted onto the coaching staffwhile the Als were losing seven of eight games.
And it was Popp who told Higgins how things might improve offensively this season. Nothing wrong with that - but when Higgins seemingly refused to take his boss' advice, there was cause for concern.
And when Higgins, honest as always, made controversial comments about veteran rush-end John Bowman last week, his fate likely was sealed.
"I would hope I have the confidence of the players. I brought every one of these guys here. Everybody has their own opinion. Unsolicited opinions are about as helpful as the bubble gum on my shoe. I couldn't care less," Popp said. "Internally, you're never going to make everybody happy.
"I feel I have great leadership skills. I explained to them what I think needs to be fixed. I've been asked several times to step in under difficult situations. I've been able to show them the way and get into the playoffs. It doesn't mean I wave a magic wand."
With the Ticats unbeaten at home in 10 league and playoffgames over the last year while scoring an average of 36.5 points per game, it might take more than Popp pulling a rabbit out of his hat to stop this juggernaut. Even a speed bump at this juncture might help. Still, Montreal players know they've already defeated Hamilton once this season, at home, last month.
"Everybody's talking about the streak. They're 6-2. The last team they lost to was us," Bowman emphatically stated.
As expected, Als tailback Tyrell Sutton will miss the game with what's being described as general soreness. He's on the one-game injured list. Rush-end Aaron Lavarias, who underwent surgery on his finger, is back on the six-game list.
hzurkowsky @montrealgazette.com twitter.com/HerbZurkowsky1
Credit: HERB ZURKOWSKY; Montreal Gazette
Illustration JOHN MAHONEY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / "There's always people who aren't going to like a change," says Alouettes GM and head coach Jim Popp, right, alongside quarterbacks coach Anthony Calvillo. "That's understandable. Get used to it. It's life."

