OK, so the setting isn't exactly Sherwood Forest and the protagonists aren't Robin Hood, Little John and Maid Marian. Nor are the antagonists the cursed Sheriff of Nottingham and Prince John.
The setting is a massive space - where, in lieu of forest green, white predominates - in the heart of St-Henri, and it's hard to tell the protagonists from the antagonists because they are all sporting protective face masks. But the weapon of choice is one favoured by Robin - a bow, albeit with foam-tipped arrows being slung.
The activity is called Dodge-Bow, an amalgam of archery, dodge ball and paintball - although not nearly as messy or as painful as the latter events.
There are no good or bad folk - either robbing from the rich and giving to the poor, or vice versa. There are two teams of 10 who fling arrows at one another, all the while trying to avoid being struck by taking cover behind large foam cushions. The only hitch here is that if opponents catch the arrows, they are not eliminated from the contest, but rather emerge victorious.
DodgeBow not only offers another method to deal with pent-up urban stress and angst, it also provides a rare opportunity to shoot at your friends, coworkers and even bosses without facing any incrimination.
Scott McDonach, one of the four enterprising 20-somethings from Montreal behind Dodge-Bow, calls the activity teambuilding. To that end, numerous local companies have shown up at the venue to release both arrows and anxiety.
"There are no harsh feelings, either, after the game is complete," McDonach says. "Where else could an employee go and target his boss with arrows - and not get arrested? Or deal with a colleague who has been difficult with you? It's most therapeutic."
McDonach can speak firsthand about that kind of interaction. An engineer by trade, he is, by day, involved in the construction of the new Champlain Bridge - which, with deadlines and costs factored in, can lead to all kinds of mental strain. So he had his work gang do DodgeBow bonding.
"It really did the trick, too," he says.
DodgeBow has drawn all sorts of participants, men and women, from CEGEP leagues to corporate events to birthday, bachelor and, yes, bachelorette parties. There are even special bows for kids.
Although some of the regulars have become quite advanced - to the point that they are more skilled than the owners - a knowledge of archery is not necessary for newcomers. Before the teams head on to the court, they are given a 10-minute instructional course by animators on the dos and don'ts. One of the don'ts is no deliberate head shots - regardless of the facial protection.
"Of course, the most important rule is that if a participant finds an arrow without a foamed tip, they are not to fire them," McDonach says. "But this has never happened, and we don't expect it ever will. We just throw that in for comic relief."
The games last 50 minutes at a cost of $24.95 per participant or $375 for a 20-person group session.
McDonach and his partners have trademarked DodgeBow and are in the process of selling franchises for the brand across the land.
There are a variety of games, and the team left with the most players is generally declared the winner. Because of the lightness of the arrows and the mask protection, McDonach reports there have been no serious injuries - just a few minor cuts - since the inception of Dodge-Bow two years ago. Also, it helps that booze is verboten on the premises.
There have been similar game concepts in Australia and Toronto, but McDonach and his partners tweaked the formula in coming up with their unique version.
"It's a really good cardio workout as well as a nerve reliever," McDonach says. "We also feel that it's a lot more accessible than paintball."
Not to mention that it saves on the laundry costs of the latter.
In what should come as no surprise, McDonach notes that the women often rule in this sport in mixed groups.
"The women are a lot more nimble and they are quicker," McDonach says. "It's not just a question of aiming and shooting accuracy - it's also about being able to avoid being shot at the same time. It's also about strategy on one level, and the women score very well on that front, too."
True to form, DodgeBow animator Anouk Dugas, an aspiring actress, proves to be nimble, quick and most strategic in a pickup contest that has left her alone on one side of the court. Against all odds, she successfully takes on and beats the three remaining guys on the other side.
"I'm the newest here, and I've only been doing this a few months. The guys are really good, too," says Dugas, 21. "I can't really say that I'm much of an athlete. I'm not much of a good archer, either. I guess I just lucked out here."
Don't think so. The evidence is compelling.
"Perhaps women have an advantage because they are better at dodging in general," Dugas quips. "Maybe being an actress also helps, because that is rather competitive and involves a lot of interactive social strategy."
Adam Martelli, another of the DodgeBow owners, is one of the three guys Dugas took down.
"Give her full marks, but the bottom line, win or lose, is that we're all de-stressed at the end of the game," says Martelli, an engineer with a major Montreal construction company by day.
"When it comes down to it, we're all big kids at heart here. And because we're engineers, maybe a little bit geeky, too."
bbrownstein@postmedia.com Twitter.com/billbrownstein
Credit: BILL BROWNSTEIN; The Gazette
Illustration JOHN MAHONEY / Anouk Dugas sidesteps an incoming foam-tipped arrow during a recent game of DodgeBow in St-Henri. Several local companies have shown up at the venue to release both arrows and anxiety as a team-building activity, writes Bill Brownstein. Before players hit the court, they are given a 10-minute instructional course.

