When as many as 150,000 students skipped school to take to the streets of Montreal on March 15, their key demand was urgent government and societal action to fight climate change.
But local youth had a second demand that has been somewhat overshadowed by the magnitude of the climate emergency and the fast-closing window of time left to save the planet.
Over a summer in which the stakes seemed to get even higher, and as students from kindergarten to university head back to school in the coming weeks, momentum is building behind this important parallel issue: environmental education.
"We thought we had 10 to 12 years, now they say we have maybe 18 months to act. That's why young people are so mobilized," said Léa Ilardo, one of the founders of La planète s'invite à l'université, a coalition of campus-based activist groups that organized the demonstration in Montreal in solidarity with students around the world. "For us, education is indispensable to the cause."
Many young people are acutely aware their future hangs in the balance, as increasingly dire reports emerge about the speed at which the planet is warming. Stifling heat waves made July the hottest month ever recorded on Earth. The melting of permafrost and ice is accelerating in the polar regions. The pace of deforestation is nearing a tipping point in the Amazon.
The damaging effects of land-use policy and agricultural practices are contributing to the planet's demise. Yet resistance to weaning humanity off fossil fuels continues in many quarters.
There is a broad sense among youth that humanity wouldn't be in this mess if people were more educated about the environment, the principles of ecology and the impact of various practices and actions, said Ilardo, a student at Université du Québec à Montréal.
When preparations for the protest began last winter, she said calling on the Quebec government to green the education system was immediately endorsed as a key issue. Soon after, though, the student organizers became aware of an ongoing effort by educators, pedagogical experts and non-governmental organizations to bring more environmental education into the classroom. The students and the Coalition éducation environnement écocitoyenneté have now teamed up. They are supporting each other's efforts and pushing the Quebec government to act.
"It's something very concrete," Ilardo said, speaking in advance of a planned meeting with Education Minister Jean-François Roberge.
"It's not just a course in CEGEP where you learn how climate change works. ... All the schools should have a garden and the students should learn about gardening and food cultivation, for example."
Hugues Asselin, the coordinator at UQAM's Centre de recherche en éducation et formation relative à l'environnement et l'écocitoyenneté, said the endeavour had been in the works for years, leveraging the experience and knowledge of grassroots groups and NGOs. It crystallized last May with the unveiling of the strategy at the National Assembly.
"Institutionalizing" environmental education isn't so much about adding a course or two to the already jam-packed curriculum. Rather, Asselin said it's more about ensuring a green ethos infuses the school system at every level to build the next generation of ecologically responsible citizens.
Many countries including Belgium and Colombia have such policies, said Asselin. And the ironic thing is that Quebec used to as well. Various programs were in place from the late 1970s on, after the creation of the environment ministry, and an interdepartmental committee with an educational mandate existed until the early 1990s. But it fell out of favour.
The new strategy has the backing of all Quebec's opposition parties, civil society and some unions. But the power of the student movement has helped open doors with the Coalition Avenir Québec, as it attempts to make a belated green shift.
"I think the young people who took to the streets last spring feel that education is not fulfilling its potential ... as much for training people to meet the challenges of the emergency we are facing as constructing a vision for the world that is global. It's a very important missing element," said Asselin. "We have to change things as soon as possible. And we need to give students the tools to do that."
As young Quebecers call for a greener school system as well as action on the climate crisis, they are also playing a fundamental role in educating their parents, grandparents and the rest of society. Another march is scheduled for Sept. 27 in Montreal to coincide with a crucial United Nations meeting in New York on member states'emissions reduction targets.
"On Sept. 27, we want our parents and all of society to join us," said Ilardo. "Younger generations know we cannot continue at the same level of consumption, the same rhythm we're going at now. ... Our parents who grew up with a different paradigm, with different rhetoric, we want to bring them with us. We are ready." ahanes@postmedia.com
CREDIT: ALLISON HANES;The Gazette

