(From Montreal Gazette, November 11, 2014) Due to a reporting error, a story in Monday's paper about a Montreal ceremony commemorating Kristallnacht incorrectly said Liberal Member of Parliament Irwin Cotler has retired. In fact, Cotler has announced he will not seek re-election in the next federal election. *****
Each year, there are fewer and fewer witnesses to the horrors of that night 76 years ago in Germany and Austria, when bands of Nazis and their sympathizers massacred Jews, smashing the windows of Jewish-owned stores and burning down synagogues.
But on Sunday night, two witnesses who survived Kristallnacht - known as the "Night of Broken Glass" - each spoke about their experiences in a sombre ceremony in Montreal attended by more than 600 people.
The first witness was Irene Stengel, a 97-year-old Holocaust survivor, whose home in Zatec, Austria, was vandalized by the Nazis on the night of Nov. 9, 1938. She stood unassisted before the podium at the Gelber Centre, reading from a prepared text, speaking in a clear voice, alternating from English to French.
"It was very bad," Stengel told the audience. "They had smeared (messages on) the houses outside with red paint, 'Dirty Jews.' That was written all over our house. After Kristallnacht, everybody was afraid and tried to get out and leave the country. I could have gone to England with the help of friends, together with my mother, but she refused. She didn't want to leave her father behind."
Ultimately, her parents were picked up by the Gestapo and sent to concentration camps, her mother to Auschwitz and her father to Buchenwald. Both perished.
At the end of her speech, Stengel unwrapped from a handkerchief a toy dog - "my mother's last gift to me."
"But it is there, and I speak to it as if it were my mother, every morning and every night."
The next witness was not Jewish, but he and his family risked their lives in Germany to hide several Jewish families in their building's cellar. Harold Winter, who is 84, recalled that as an eight-year-old boy, he saw a "Brown Shirt," a Nazi storm trooper, toss a Jewish baby out the window of his apartment building.
"In the days leading up to Kristallnacht, there was restlessness among the Nazis and their supporters in our neighbourhood until the night of the 9th of November," Winter recounted. "I saw the SS going around smashing the windows of shops, taking away the merchandise and beating up the Jews who were there."
Organized by the Montreal Holocaust Memorial Centre, the event drew students from Bialik High School, some of whom sang songs in Yiddish. Among those in attendance were retired MP Irwin Cotler, Russell Copeman, borough mayor for Cote-des-Neiges- Notre-Dame-de-Grace, and Anthony Housefather, mayor of Cote Saint-Luc.
aderfel@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel
Credit: AARON DERFEL; Montreal Gazette

