This would be an emotional evening at the Bell Centre, from before the puck dropped between the Canadiens' Tomas Plekanec and Colorado's Matt Duchene.
One of the two flag-bearers on Saturday, young hockey players who traditionally skate a lap around the Habs' end to precede the home team onto the ice, was carrying the blue, white and red flag of France, the other gripping the CH.
A moment of absolute silence, a quiet not heard in this full arena since the breathless salute last Dec. 9 to the late Jean Beliveau, was followed by the playing of La Marseillaise, the flag of France digitally rustling the full length and breadth of the rink; fans cheered as the anthem played, their camera-phones appearing as points of light by the thousands throughout the arena bowl.
Friday's horrifying attacks in Paris were still painfully fresh when the Canadiens saluted the nation with which Quebec holds a special, historic bond. It was the second time in 10 months that La Marseilleise filled the Bell Centre before a Habs game, the first a show of solidarity with a deeply scarred France last January following the murderous Charlie Hebdo shootings.
The Canadiens were unbeaten in regulation on home ice this season with seven victories alongside one overtime loss. And a look at the standings suggested the Avalanche, last in the Western Conference Central Division, seemed more like a flurry, no matter their modest two-game win streak.
Indeed, the Habs were a blizzard around the Colorado goal for the first 18 minutes, outshooting their visitors 18-8 in the first period.
But the Avalanche, having taken a 1-0 lead just 3:26 after the opening faceoff, slammed home two goals 13 seconds apart with time winding down, Nathan MacKinnon scoring both.
Has MacKinnon ever scored consecutive goals more quickly?
"Maybe in atom," he said, with a laugh, after the game.
It was no laughing matter for the Canadiens. At 3-0, the rout was on.
"No way we should have been up 3-0 in the first," Avalanche head coach Patrick Roy said, "but it happens."
Brendan Gallagher gave the Habs a breath of life midway through the second period, closing the gap to two goals, before Blake Comeau scored shorthanded on Montreal goalie Mike Condon, an ugly shot to the fivehole that sucked the air out of the Bell Centre.
"Scoring that fourth goal was really important to us," Roy said. "We were short-handed and Montreal had the momentum."
The Avalanche then scored a pair 3:05 apart midway through the third to send the fans streaming to the exits, the Canadiens losing their second straight for only the second time this season, the first coming in Vancouver and Edmonton in late October.
goalie Reto Berra wasn't seeing a few pucks. The Canadiens registered 40 shots, P.K. Subban leading the way with eight, Gallagher, linemate Max Pacioretty and defenceman JeffPetry taking six each.
Another 22 shots blocked en route to Berra and 13 more that missed the target show the Canadiens fired 75 times, compared with 40 by the Avalanche, 24 of which made it to the net.
On Sunday morning, Berra led the NHL in goals-against, with a 1.50 average, and a save percentage with .953.
"It's weird," Berra said later, speaking of sitting atop the league's goaltending mountain.
"Probably not," he added when asked whether he'd have believed anyone in September who told him he'd be leading two categories in mid-November. "It's an unbelievable feeling, it's hard to describe right now," said Berra, now 1-1 lifetime against the Canadiens.
In groin-injury relief of defacto No. 1 Semyon Varlamov, Berra has found a groove deeper than a Montreal sewer repair. His effort Saturday swelled the chest of Roy, who's played a decent game of goal or two in this city.
"In the first, they dominated us," the coach said of the Canadiens. "They had a really good first period (but) Reto was perfect. He made some great saves, kept us in the game and gave us a chance to take the lead. That's the role goaltenders can play in today's game. ... "I always enjoy coming back to Montreal," Roy said. "Do I make it bigger than it is? No. It's the two points that matter."
All the confident Berra is doing, he said, is "enjoying the moment" as his team claws its way up the standings.
Which is more than could be said Saturday for Condon, who was entirely human while not getting a lot of help on the back end. Late in the game, a few fickle leatherlungs in the cheap(er) seats tried unsuccessfully to organize a chant of "Car-ey! Car-ey!" It was a sarcastic jab at Condon, who admittedly was porous - four goals on 11 shots for a .636 save percentage - and his third-period reliever Dustin Tokarski, who yielded two on 13 shots coming cold offthe bench.
Condon has only been mostly superb since stepping into the skates of injured Carey Price, who's been out for two weeks with a lower-body injury.
Saturday's loss to Colorado, put in the context of the evening and the event that sadly and stirringly lifted its curtain, was two points not gained. It was nothing more. dstubbs@montrealgazette.com twitter/Dave_Stubbs
Credit: DAVE STUBBS; The Gazette

