In July, the British newspaper The Guardian lavished four reviews and articles on the Montreal band Arcade Fire, who played a live concert in Manchester just before the release of their new album, Everything Now. The headline of one of those articles stopped me in my tracks: "Did Arcade Fire just fake news themselves with a spoof gig dress code?" My eyebrows rose only a little at the last four words, all one-syllable nouns; headline writers often rely on shortcuts to deliver meaning in a limited space. But since when was "fake news" a verb? In 2014, the expression "fake news" did not appear once in the Montreal Gazette. So far this year, it has featured in at least 74 articles. (Thank you, Mr. Trump.) Sometimes the phrase is followed by nouns like "media" and "stories." On other occasions it stands alone, but never before have I seen "fake news" deployed as a verb. You are hereby warned.
A single headline is not enough to count as a trend, yet recently I've come across a variety of other examples of what linguists call conversion.
The process has nothing to do with religious belief; it entails a word being changed into a different part of speech. Often the conversion involves "verbing," where nouns or adjectives turn into verbs. A few weeks ago, a Watchwords reader, Leena Sandblom, wrote to ask: "Just heard a brand new one on CTV noon news: 'are efforting to.'Have you seen any instances of 'effort'used as a verb?" No, I hadn't. But some assiduous Googling alerted me to a few examples. In a San Francisco newspaper: "Even ol'Silent Cal'Coolidge would have efforted a thin, fake smile, but Trump just glared at the dais."
On a website about junior hockey players: "'Stas'grew up in a single-parent home in Russia with a mother who efforted to advance her son's fledging hockey career." People have occasionally used "effort" as a verb before - one case was even recorded in the 17th century - but there's no need to do this ("try" and "attempt" mean the same thing). Even so, I wouldn't rule out success. English is full of old conversions that are now part and parcel of the language. Among the verbs in this column, "lavish," "feature" and "alert" are examples.
Conversion has also affected "banner." In May, news sources reported that "Milrem, the Estonian technology company, is bannering its Titan multi-purpose unmanned ground vehicle for military use." Apart from its familiar role as a noun, "banner" has long been a recognized verb in journalism, meaning to display a news item under a big headline. Now, it appears, "to banner" may have become a synonym for "to promote."
Sometimes old forms of words reappear unexpectedly after lying dormant for decades. That's the case with a verb used by Sgt. David Hornung of the Gila County sheriff's office, who was quoted on BBC News in July after a flash flood swept through an Arizona canyon, killing 10 people. Hornung said: "A large family group was down by the river recreating." At first this struck me as absurd, but in truth "recreate" has a long history as a verb, meaning to refresh, indulge or amuse. "There are many illustrious youths," wrote a London journalist in 1712, "who frequently recreate themselves by driving of a hackney-coach." For hackney-coach, three centuries later, read SUV.
A verb rising to prominence in our troubled age is "dox" - to obtain private information on the internet, especially about a person whose political beliefs you disagree with, and then to embarrass or shame that person by publishing the details.
"Doxing" was born between 2000 and 2005, after an initial shortening of the noun "documents" to "docs."
It, too, is a product of verbing.
markabley@sympatico.ca
Credit: MARK ABLEY; The Gazette

