The level of flooding that has hit Montreal and other parts of Quebec, brought on by the annual snow melt and unusually high amounts of rainfall, has been described as a once-in-a-century event. Montreal Gazette photographers share some of their images - and their thoughts - as the waters begin to recede and some residents return to assess the damage to their homes.
Credit: The Gazette
Illustration ALLEN MCINNIS / Volunteers ferry equipment as the Riviere des Mille Iles rises in Ile-Mercier, near Ile-Bizard, on May 3. "One common take-away from the flooding is the level of community spirit," says Allen McInnis. "These three men did not feel they deserved any acknowledgment for trying to save a home that was at risk while theirs was safe and above water."; JOHN MAHONEY / A lighter moment captured by John Mahoney on Monday: Girls taking selfies with a soldier from Canadian Forces Base Valcartier while being driven home through flooded streets in Deux-Montagnes.; PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Montreal police assist residents on Chateaux-Pierrefonds Ave. on Sunday. About 12 hours earlier, recalls Pierre Obendrauf, Premier Philippe Couillard held a news briefing down this street. "He was high and dry and in his loafers. When I drove down early the next morning, the water had breached a dike, the army was present and residents were scrambling to save a few personal belongings."; DAVE SIDAWAY / "For residents on Lalonde St. in Roxboro, the army saved the day by erecting a 1.2-kilometre sandbag dike," says Dave Sidaway. This photo was taken Wednesday.; DAVE SIDAWAY / LEFT: "It could be a long summer for the kids on Ile-Mercier with their playgrounds decimated by flood waters," Dave Sidaway says of this photo taken on Thursday.; DAVE SIDAWAY / RIGHT: Despite flood waters infiltrating his basement, Robert Kelly puts on a brave face outside his Ile-Mercier home on May 5. "I love his attitude," says Dave Sidaway.; JOHN MAHONEY / The tulips are almost in bloom, John Mahoney observes, in this yard where a car sits half-submerged Monday at the corner of du Lac Blvd. and 15th Ave. in Deux-Montagnes.; DAVE SIDAWAY / RIGHT: "Tim Koochey's face betrays his emotions," Dave Sidaway notes, as Koochey and daughter Nathalie try to recover items from their home in Pierrefonds on Monday.; ALLEN MCINNIS / Waves wash up against an evacuated home in Hudson on May 5. Residents were complaining that debris carried by the waves was damaging property. "I was surprised to see the damage the waves were inflicting on these homes," Allen McInnis says. "The front balcony was slowly torn away from one home, making eerie sounds of wood buckling from the pressure."; DAVE SIDAWAY / LEFT: "The residents of des Macons St. in Pierrefonds coped as well as they could in a bad situation," notes Dave Sidaway. Here, Kayleigh Donovan is carried to the front door by her husband Travis Fraser on Monday.; PIERRE OBENDRAUF / RIGHT: The dazed look of this woman inside her garage, while flood waters flow down her street, captures the "sense of resignation," says Pierre Obendrauf. The photo was taken May 6 on Jean-Yves St. in Ile-Bizard.; JOHN MAHONEY / Alain Leroux, centre, and Bernard Begin paddle to pick up supplies on du Lac Blvd. in Deux-Montagnes, as military personnel deliver sandbags on Monday. "I was focusing mostly on the presence of soldiers in Deux-Montagnes working to sandbag the local sewage pumping station when these two residents came out of a side street in their canoes," says John Mahoney.

