An excellent new documentary by Quebec filmmaker Martin Frigon about Montreal's changing skyline draws on a book by award-winning journalist Henry Aubin, a book the filmmaker says is as relevant today as when it was published more than four decades ago.
Frigon calls Cities Held Hostage - set to screen over the next few months in venues including the Rendez-vous du cinéma québécois, the Cinéma du Parc and CBC's Absolutely Canadian - "an essay" on Aubin's 1977 book City for Sale, "a return to it - and a film on the city today."
Aubin, who retired from the Montreal Gazette in 2013 after 40 years with the paper, has a clear memory of Montreal in the 1970s: It was a time when gracious greystone neighbourhoods were being bulldozed and supplanted by impersonal highrise buildings, as he recalled in an interview, a period during which the city lost its distinctive architectural character as "these shlock high-rises that could be anywhere" were erected alongside such classic structures as the Sun Life and Dominion Square buildings.
He had just won a National Newspaper Award for investigative reporting when then city editor Jim Peters asked what he wished to investigate next: Aubin replied that he wanted to find out who was behind all the downtown development - in effect, who owned Montreal. Even as the skyline was being transformed, he recalled, it seemed that nobody knew who was behind most of the projects; not even the architects necessarily knew the names of the ultimate owners of the buildings they were designing.
At the time, "Canada was often called a branch plant of the United States," Aubin said. He figured he'd find it was American money behind the buildings.
To his "complete surprise," he learned that it wasn't American but European investment - and that, in addition to land holdings, European-backed companies controlled nearly all Quebec's cement production along with construction of roads and bridges.
An 18-month investigation took him to seven countries as he uncovered "a complex skein" of relationships between foreign development companies, public works contractors, building supply manufacturers and moneylending institutions.
The biggest builders, Aubin discovered, were British or Italian "and the Germans didn't build. They bought."
Italians built Montreal's Tour de la Bourse, for instance, "and the company that built Place Ville Marie was an insurance company in London that was developing similar projects in South Africa and all over the world.
"That explains the uniformity," he said. "These investors wanted to build large buildings in which you could cram as many tenants as possible and make as much money as possible."
He took no issue with people wanting to make money but, in the case of those buildings, money was "almost the only concern," he said.
Published in the Gazette in 1976 in a series titled Who Owns Montreal?, Aubin's articles earned him another National Newspaper Award. The 1977 book expanding on the series, City for Sale: International Financiers Take a Major North American City by Storm (James Lorimer & Co.), and a French version, Les vrais propriétaires de Montréal (Éditions l'Étincelle), received international acclaim.
Aubin moved from investigative reporting to writing editorials and, later, columns focusing on issues affecting Montreal. He's written three more books: two more non-fiction works and one work of fiction aimed at younger readers. He retired after a 48-year career in newspapers and is currently at work on a follow-up to his 2002 book, The Rescue of Jerusalem: The Alliance Between Hebrews and Africans in 701 BC.
Although City for Sale remains on reading lists for urban studies courses, Aubin assumed the book was largely "just forgotten" - until he got a call from Frigon telling him he wanted to make a film based on it. Frigon had made a 2012 film about the impact of real estate development on Quebec's Laurentians, La grande invasion, and he was on Radio-Canada's Médium Large talking about it when another guest, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi professor Marc-Urbain Proulx, suggested he read Aubin's book. He did - and was inspired.
"It read like a detective novel - all 400 pages of it," Frigon recalled. To him, City for Sale is as relevant today as in 1977. "It could have been written today."
As Aubin said: "The names of the owners of the companies that transformed Montreal back then are different - but the same principles remain."
The owners remain unaccountable, he said.
"Look what they did to Griffintown: They built absolute shlock - the same impersonal architecture and urban design that we have seen ever since the '70s."
Cities Held Hostage, a production of Films de l'Oeil, features interviews with Aubin, City for Sale publisher James Lorimer, architect and retired urban studies professor David Hanna, Quebec anthropologist and writer Serge Bouchard, and Guy Garand, director of the Conseil régional de l'environnement de Laval. It is disturbing and, in places, bleak - but it is a film that anyone who cares about Montreal should watch.
The 45-minute film features interviews in both English and French and inspired use of animation; a French version, Main basse sur la ville, is a few minutes longer. Both film and book use Montreal as a case study, but look beyond it at global investment forces that drive the continuing homogenization, as Aubin calls it, of major cities and promote suburban sprawl.
"You look at the individual buildings that compose Montreal's skyline today - and they are no different from the buildings in Seattle or Tampa or Brussels or Nairobi or Johannesburg," he said. What makes the skylines of these cities interchangeable is that the buildings in question were often erected by the same companies.
"It is this international homogenized architecture."
Said Frigon: "The behaviours that Henry Aubin denounced are still happening."
As Aubin observed in the conclusion to City for Sale: "Power in shaping Montreal is held by people, whether foreign or domestic, who are faceless. Being unknown, they exercise power without accountability. They are powerful largely by default, by the abnegation of power by the community itself." sschwartz@postmedia.com Twitter.com/susanschwartz
AT A GLANCE Cities Held Hostage, which has been televised a few times since last August, will air nationally on Saturday, May 26 (1 p.m.) on CBC-TV's Absolutely Canadian. The French-language version, Main basse sur la ville, will be screened March 1 at 9 p.m. at the Quartier Latin as part of the Rendez-vous du cinéma québécois festival, with two other films. There will be a Q&A session with director Martin Frigon, producer Catherine Drolet, architect David Hanna and retired journalist Henry Aubin, whose book City for Sale inspired the film. Starting March 30, the film will have a weeklong screening at the Cinéma du Parc. Both English and French versions will be shown and followed by roundtable discussions with panellists on such themes as city planning in Montreal, architecture and land development.
CREDIT: SUSAN SCHWARTZ;The Gazette

