I'm dreaming of a white Christmas, just like the ones Bing Crosby used to sing about - long before anyone talked about global warming and when the only carbon footprints were snow angels in the schoolyard.
But this December, you are more likely to see someone skateboarding than snowboarding in Montreal, which bears no resemblance to a winter wonderland anywhere outside the surreal holiday window display at the downtown Ogilvy store. Even the slopes of Mount Royal, a seasonal palette normally caked in snowflakes by now, remain as brown as chocolate bark.
With only four sleeps to go, Montrealers are once again facing the prospect of a green Noel on Dec. 25.
The forecasted high for Christmas Day is a mild 3C, according to Environment Canada, which is also predicting a relatively balmy 14C for Christmas Eve. Too bad the tennis courts are closed.
The warmest temperature recorded for Montreal on Dec. 25 was 12.8 C in 1964.
Green Christmases are not unheard of. In fact, there have been 14 since 1955, according to Environment Canada.
But half that total has come in the last two decades, the most recent in 2014. The others were 1994, '96, '98, '99, 2002 and '06.
Prior to that, green Christmases were less frequent, happening no more than twice per decade from the 1950s through the 1980s.
It was back-to-back green in 1956-57, then again in 1964 and '67. It happened twice in the 1970s ('71, '79) and only once the following decade in 1988.
Andre Cantin, a meteorologist with Environment Canada, said the chances of a green Christmas in Montreal from the mid-1950s till the mid-1980s were about 20 per cent, or twice per decade.
In the last two decades, however, the figure jumped to 35 per cent.
"With the mean temperature rising above zero, whatever snow that does fall soon melts, increasing the probability of a green Christmas," Cantin explained.
The long range seasonal forecast calls for a relatively mild winter in Montreal.
Temperatures are not expected to dip below freezing on a builda-backyard-rink kind of basis till some time in 2016.
"We're forecasting temperatures warmer than normal, which is consistent with the fact we have a strong El Nino present in the Pacific Ocean," added Marie-Eve Giguere of Environment Canada.
"That being said, an El Nino doesn't always mean a green Christmas. The strongest El Nino ever recorded was in 1997-98 and there was not a green Christmas that year. But there was one the year before and the year after," Giguere said.
El Nino aside, planet Earth is also running a fever these days.
The United Nations weather, water and climate body is predicting 2015 will be the warmest ever recorded, and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) recently
noted that the years 2011-2015 was the warmest five-year period on record.
The world's 10 warmest years have all occurred since 1998, with eight of them being since 2005, the WMO said.
"This is all bad news for the planet," WMO Secretary-General Michel Jarraud said last month.
It's also bad news for ski hill operators in Quebec, who are feeling the pinch of mild weather.
Mont-Tremblant had 15 of 96 ski runs open last week and many others in the Laurentians and Eastern Townships were closed while waiting for snow-making machines to do what Mother Nature won't: cover the trails.
The Owl's Head ski centre in Mansonville planned to celebrate its 50th year of operation this winter, but owner Fred Korman said Thursday that it has been too mild to even make snow.
"It's tough, really tough," Korman said. "I've seen Christmas with no snow before, but we had weather cold enough to make snow."
Owl's Head has yet to open and Korman predicted a tough year ahead for most ski centres in Quebec.
"I don't think it's any secret at all.
It's going to be tough, that's for sure ... and we can't do a thing about it."
Of course, climate change might have a certain appeal for those still thawing out from the Big Chill of last winter when Montrealers suffered through a record cold snap in February, risking frostbite simply by getting out of bed in the morning.
But this holiday season, which has seen more rain than snow hit the ground, downtown retailers were more likely to sell an umbrella than a Canada Goose jacket. At the Simon's store on Ste-Catherine St. W., a sales clerk said winter jackets were still selling, just not as briskly as in past winters.
While Montrealers will be happy to see lower heating bills this winter, the Accuweather winter forecast also warns that an El Nino year means more freezing rain could be on its way.
"Unfortunately, the winter pattern will also favour an increased risk of ice storms, especially from eastern Ontario to southern Quebec, including the cities of Ottawa and Montreal as temperature inversions will be more common," Accuweather posted on its website.
Montrealers will recall the last time El Nino passed through town, he turned offthe lights throughout much of Quebec.
Few here will ever forget the Ice Storm of 1998, when nearly a week of freezing rain left the province's electrical grid in blinkered tatters and millions huddling by candlelight.
While no one is predicting a repeat of that catastrophic event, for now Montrealers' best line of defence against the elements was having their winter tires installed by the legally required Dec. 15 deadline.
For now, however, a snow brush is optional.
jmeagher@montrealgazette.com
Credit: JOHN MEAGHER; The Gazette
Illustration GRAHAM HUGHES, THE CANADIAN PRESS / A woman kayaks on the Lake of Two Mountains, Sunday. The temperature in the region was at -2C.; SUSAN FERGUSON MONTREAL GAZETTE / SOURCE: ENVIRONMENT CANADA

