Paige Theng doused her dog Duke in cold water multiple times on each walk they took during last week's heat wave in Montreal. She bought an air conditioner for her N.D.G. home - something she wouldn't have done had it not been for Duke. But the dog still got diarrhea and struggled through the record-breaking temperatures.
Furry animals like dogs and cats have a limited capacity to sweat, according to Dr. Carole-Anne Laurin, a veterinarian at SPCA Montreal. That leaves them more susceptible than humans to heat stroke.
Some pets are even more sensitive to the heat, including shortnosed dogs and animals that are obese. Pay extra close attention for signs of heat stroke in these animals.
When walking a dog, keep your strolls shorter than usual and avoid going out in the hot afternoons. Walk in the shade and along the grass, and avoid giving the dog intense physical exercise. Laurin says hot weather offers a good opportunity to focus on mental stimulation. Fifteen minutes of mental stimulation - such as teaching your dog tricks or playing games - can be equivalent to one hour of running for a dog, according to the veterinarian.
Other ways to keep an animal cool include taking them swimming in a lake or pitching a kiddie pool in your backyard. Offer them frozen treats. Try filling a balloon with water, freezing it, then removing the balloon and giving the ball of ice to them like a big frozen lollipop.
If you think your pet might have heat stroke, take them to a veterinarian immediately. On the way, wrap them in a cold towel, but don't put ice or ice packs directly on their body.
Never leave your dog in a parked car. "The temperature can get up to 20 degrees higher within 10 minutes even in a parked car or a car that has the windows down. You're risking your animal's life when you're leaving them in a parked car," Laurin said.
It's usually not recommended to shave your animal, Laurin said.
"The fur protects them from UV rays and it seems to have insulating properties even against the heat," said Laurin.
If you have shaved your animal, make sure to apply sunscreen before bringing them outside.
As for birds, snakes and other animals, keep their cages out of direct sunlight and don't put them directly next to air conditioning units.
CREDIT: DARYA MARCHENKOVA;The Gazette

