The year ended much as it began - with a thick blanket of snow covering the city.
Montrealers were digging out on Tuesday putting an end to the bizarre springlike weather that marked most of December.
The snowstorm served as a reality check only four days after temperatures near 20 C brought golfers to the links and kite boarders and windsurfers to the water. By Tuesday evening, Environment Canada's winter storm warning was still in effect. It maintained a forecast of up to 40 cm of snow accumulation by the end of the day. The city had already received 25 cm of snow as of 2 p.m. About 100 flights - split equally between departures and arrivals - were cancelled at Pierre Elliott Trudeau airport Tuesday morning, but by late afternoon most flights resumed according to normal schedule, said an official with the Aeroports de Montreal.
Despite the poor visibility, Montreal hospitals did not report an abnormal increase in the number of people showing up at emergency rooms with injuries caused by falls.
Nez Rouge suspended its drivehome service for Tuesday night in the Montreal and Quebec City regions and in most of southern Quebec because of the bad weather. Snow-clearing operations in the city of Montreal's 19 boroughs will begin at 7 a.m. on Wednesday and run until 7 p.m. on Thursday. At that point, crews will take a break for New Year's, and resume snow clearing on Jan. 2 and continue until all streets are cleared. This is the first test of Montreal's new snow-clearing policy, which harmonizes operations across the boroughs. That means all boroughs are required to start snow-clearing operations at the same time.
Despite the blast of wintry weather, December will be the hottest on record, according to Environment Canada meteorologist Marie-Eve Giguere.
"Christmas Eve, it was 20 degrees warmer than the average," Giguere said. Daily highs were above zero Celsius for the whole month until this past Monday and Tuesday. Wednesday is also forecast to be below zero before temperatures climb above freezing on Thursday.
The warm temperatures this December were a nice change after a bone-chilling winter of 2015.
January 2015 arrived with a light dusting on New Year's Day, and 20 centimetres of snow two days later.
A thaw and then a deep freeze seemed to catch the city offguard, because many boroughs didn't send workers out in time to spread salt, resulting in slippery sidewalks, and the mayor opening up an inquiry into the slow response.
It was the winter of expensive heating bills, as the mercury dipped below zero on Jan. 20 and stayed there until March 4 - one of the longest streaks of below-zero temperatures in Montreal on record. The city also saw its coldest February on record, which brought with it a record number of freezing pipes in Montreal homes - with more than 2,000 homes affected, and waiting times of up to a week for some households to get their water back.
As if the cold and snow weren't enough, those taking public transit were left out in the cold waiting for longer than usual.
A strike of Canadian Pacific workers halted service for two straight days on the Vaudreuil-Hudson, Candiac and St-Jerome commuter train lines. Overall reliability of trains and buses also took a dive in the harsh winter weather, with mechanical breakdowns galore. As for snow, we got plenty of that too, with snow falling on 16 days in January, 12 days in February, and nine days in March.
March remained colder than average on most days, with the St. Patrick's Day Parade being held downtown on the coldest day of the month, with a wind chill of nearly -20 C. Montrealers got a reprieve in April and May, with temperatures in the 20s and approaching the 30s. What they spent on heating in the winter, they saved on air conditioning in the summer, because only a few days were hotter than 30 C in July and August, and there was also plenty of rain during those months.
Temperatures remained warmer than average for most of September, October and November before the record-setting December that's wrapping up.
With the snow finally here, there is no major thaw predicted in the next few days - good news for ski hills and anyone who makes a living on outdoor winter activities. Giguere, however, predicts a warmer than usual winter, and that could mean more freezing rain and rain than snow.
"But that doesn't exclude any major cold snaps," she cautioned. jmagder@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/JasonMagder
Credit: JASON MAGDER; The Gazette
Illustration DAVE SIDAWAY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Dominique Gaudreault and Yves Giroux, right, take in the blustery scene along the Lachine Canal on Tuesday.; JOHN KENNEY, MONTREAL GAZETTE / A sidewalk plow clears the intersection of Westminster Ave. N. and Curzon St. in Montreal West on Tuesday.; ALLEN MCINNIS, MONTREAL GAZETTE / A tow-truck driver pulls STM buses out of the snow on Robert Bourassa Blvd. on Tuesday. Montreal received its first major snowfall after a warm start to winter.