It's the eternal holiday parenting quandary: What level of exhaustion will you attain to keep your children from boredom? Fret not - there are hundreds of things to do during the Christmas break. Pick five or six, and school will be back in session before you know it. And who knows? You might just have a good time while you're doing it, Hayley Juhl writes.
PLAY
This is your last chance to use your free Parks Canada pass. (Don't worry if you forgot to get a physical pass. You'll be allowed into the park for free.) Do some snow tagging on snowshoes at La Mauricie National Park, or take advantage of their 80 kilometres of ski trails. (There are heated shelters every five kilometres.) It's free to get into the park for the rest of 2017, but there are fees to rent equipment like snowshoes or fat bikes, and there's a cost if you decide to do something crazy - crazy fun - like winter camping in an o-tent-ik, a sturdy canvas-sided cabin that can be rented year-round. La Mauricie is 190 kilometres north of Montreal.
Snow tag is on Saturdays by reservation only at 819-538-3232.
Closer to home, Sir George-Etienne Cartier National Historic Site (458 Notre-Dame St. E.) has a Victorian Christmas exhibition.
It comes with a small extra charge: $3.90 per person age six and up, or $9.80 for a family.
Along part of the Lachine Canal National Historic Site (Atwater Ave. and St-Ambroise St.), check out the Christmas Village until Sunday and from Dec. 15 to 17.
Want the Parks Canada experience without having to leave the neighbourhood? Sign your children up for Club Parka, which features tons of prompts for winter fun, like creating toilet-paper binoculars, folding origami birds and making campfire muffins baked in oranges.
Information on La Mauricie, the national historic sites and all things Parks Canada can be found at pc.gc.ca. While the free passes celebrating Canada's 150th birthday expire Dec. 31, parks will offer free admission to those 17 and under starting Jan. 1.
Laval's Marche de Noel runs to Sunday, with 60 artisans, plus activities for the younger set - calash rides, a visit with Santa, makeup and storytelling. There's an igloo to warm up in, and a few favourites for sale: coffee, pea soup and mulled wine. It's at the Centre de la nature, 901 Parc Ave. See laval.ca.
Noel dans le parc runs till Dec. 25 in three parks: Place Emilie-Gamelin, Compagnons de St-Laurent and Lahaie. You can buy a Christmas tree, compare your wool coat with that of a sheep, roast marshmallows over a bonfire or watch Carnaval Abraxas perform circus arts. Check noeldansleparc. com for times and more activities. CHILL The winter break is all about soul food, whether or not your family celebrates a religious holiday. Take it to the next level by dropping the kids off at the grocery store. No, wait, we're not suggesting they stock up for the week - you'll end up with nothing but ketchup and Kraft Dinner (or maybe that's just my house). Provigo offers a host of cooking classes for children or grown-ups, with recipes ranging from full meals to Hanukkah sweets to party food. The cost ranges from $10 to $35. Visit pccookingschool.ca.
You absolutely cannot go wrong with the ballet. If you're worried you'll be bored, think of it as a lovely place to nap with some fabulous background music. At $44 to $149 a pop, The Nutcracker could be the most expensive nap you'll ever take. (We jest - you won't be bored.) It runs from Dec. 14 to 30 at Place des Arts (placedesarts.com).
Or you can see the Bolshoi Ballet perform The Nutcracker on the big screen at several movie theatres on Dec. 10. Check cineplex.com for details.
Is panto more your speed? Camelot - complete with three Merlins - plays at Hudson Village Theatre from Dec. 15 to Jan. 7.
Tickets cost $22. For details, visit villagetheatre.ca.
Then it's time for a walk through the ugliest forest you've ever seen. It's actually quite lovely, but Village du Vilain Sapin has embraced last year's much-maligned city tree, installing its ugly little sister on Prince Arthur St. At the foot of the tree is a giant mistletoe and a selfie stick, to immortalize a traditional holiday kiss in view of the ugly tree. Continues to Dec. 23. See facebook.com/villageduvilainsapin. MUSEUMS
Pointe-a-Calliere is calling all armchair managers to Passion: Hockey, celebrating Montreal's bright hockey history (shhh, stop weeping) until March 11. $7 to $17.39 at 350 Place Royale. Visit pacmusee.qc.ca.
Exporail's Railway Christmas runs till Jan. 7 and costs $10 to $20. 110 St-Pierre St., St-Constant. Visit exporail.org.
The Stewart Museum is awash in Santas, and also features the elegant miniature Szalasi Castle, till Jan. 7. Free for age 12 and under, $5 for everyone else, at 20 Tour-del'Isle Rd. See stewart-museum.org.
Step through the looking glass to the Canadian Centre for Architecture's Mirror exhibit, until Jan. 14. Free for students and children, and all on Thursdays, otherwise $7 to $10. 1920 Baile St. Visit cca.qc.ca.
Chateau Ramezay offers baking workshops, the chance to hang stockings and dress up for a selfie as a settler or fur trader. Kids under four get in for free, $5.75 to $11 for everyone else. At 280 Notre-Dame St. E. Visit chateauramezay.qc.ca.
LIGHTS Sometimes it feels like we're fighting the dark from one time change to the next, when what we should be doing is embracing it. The longest night of the year is Dec. 21, and if you're staying awake to celebrate, we have a few ideas to keep you going till the sun's return.
Go to this guy's house: Sami Hajjar has decorated his home with more than 100,000 lights, up from a measly 15,000 last year. The theme is Frozen, and his house at 9035 Jean-Bourdon Ave. comes alive at the top of the hour from 5 p.m. to 9 p.m. every day until Jan. 5. See facebook.com/events/341001539681664.
The Ursids meteor shower will be just getting underway - it peaks Dec. 23. Get away from the city lights and huddle up to watch for up to 10 meteors an hour. Keep your eyes somewhere above the Big Dipper, as that's where they originate. The Ursids is a small shower, so if you're looking for something more dramatic, set yourself up overnight Dec. 13 and 14 for the Geminid meteor shower. National Geographic says there will be 60 to 120 shooting stars an hour at peak times - since the moon sets at midnight, those peak times fall in the pre-dawn hours. For a tour of the skies with an expert, join the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada for a public talk with Kevin Kemball at 8 p.m. Dec. 13 before settling in to make wishes on falling stars with other sky fans. Free, 150 des Pins Rd., Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue. Visit rascmontreal.org.
If you want your stars close enough to touch (a dangerous thought), Space for Life's Planetarium is open every day but Mondays. There are two shows to choose from and a host of otherworldly exhibits. Plus, you're right next door to the Insectarium, Botanical Garden and Biodome. Tickets to the Planetarium cost $8 to $20.25. 4801 Pierre-De Coubertin Ave. Visit espacepourlavie.ca.
Enough with stars coming down - here are some going up. The Fire on Ice fireworks display at the Old Port is at 8 p.m. Dec. 16, 23, 30 and Jan. 6. While you're in the Old Port, it will be impossible to miss the Merry Montreal festivities, including live music, activities for children (many of them free), zip lining and skating. It culminates in a New Year's Eve party with more live music, the illumination of the Jacques Cartier Bridge and - you know what we love, Montreal - midnight fireworks.
RELAX Tuckered out yet? This will make you feel better. From our archives, this is a recipe for Truly Decadent Hot Chocolate, from Newsday's Erica Marcus, published in 1999. Serves: 4 to 6
8 oz (250 g) high-quality semisweet chocolate, finely chopped
1/2 cup (125 mL) water
1/4 cup (50 mL) light or dark corn syrup
1/4 cup (50 mL) sugar
2 tbsp (30 mL) butter, softened
6 to 8 cups (1.5 to 2 L) milk (or half-and-half or cream) 1 Place chopped chocolate in a heatproof bowl. In a heavy saucepan over medium heat, combine water, corn syrup and sugar. Bring just to a boil and pour immediately over the chocolate. Whisk until chocolate is melted and completely integrated, then whisk in butter. (At this point, the mixture can be refrigerated for up to a month.) 2 Place mixture and milk in heavy saucepan over medium heat. Whisk constantly until very hot, but not boiling. If desired, top with whipped cream and a dusting of cocoa powder. Serve.
For an individual 10-ounce (300 mL) serving, use 2 heaping tbsp (40 mL) of the chocolate base, or to taste. hjuhl@postmedia.com twitter.com/hjuhl
Credit: HAYLEY JUHL; The Gazette
Illustration PARKS CANADA / Try the snow tagging at La Mauricie National Park: You can create art on a frozen lake using ropes, snowshoes and sticks, then climb to a lookout to view your creation.; CAROLINE THIBAULT / Love hockey? Love history? Then you've got to get to Pointe-a-Calliere, where Passion: Hockey runs until March 11.; DAVE SIDAWAY / Sami Hajjar has decorated his home with more than 100,000 lights for the holidays.; DANIEL CHOINIERE, SPACE FOR LIFE / Space for Life's Planetarium has interactive exhibits for all ages, such as Exo: Our Search for Life in the Universe.

