Mayor Valérie Plante said Wednesday she wrote to borough mayors to step up efforts on snow removal because service has not achieved the same standards in all parts of the city.
"It's not about targeting and saying this one is good, this one is bad," Plante told reporters, speaking of the letter she sent Tuesday to mayors of the city's 19 boroughs, calling on them to ensure that snow clearing operations achieve maximum results.
"That's what my call is about, asking the boroughs, 'Do everything you can,'and putting pressure on the borough mayors to say, 'You need to be sure that your people are on site, and adapting to the conditions'because in some cases it wasn't as successful as we wanted," she said.
Plante noted that while it's up to the city centre to decide when a snow-removal operation begins and ends, the boroughs are responsible for removing snow and spreading abrasives on streets and sidewalks.
It was the first admission by Plante that snow removal and de-icing have not been entirely satisfactory since Montreal was hit by a combination of blizzard conditions and sub-zero temperatures the weekend of Jan. 19-20, followed by rain last Thursday that froze, coating sidewalks with ice. The city halted snow removal and reassigned crews to spread abrasives on streets and sidewalks, deploying its fleet of eight icebreakers in central districts like the Plateau-Mont-Royal, Villeray and Rosemont.
On Monday, Plante defended the city's record on snow clearing and treating treacherous sidewalks, saying the cocktail of different weather in the past two weeks was not just an excuse, but "a reality."
But Opposition leader Lionel Perez said Plante was finally responding to criticisms he has been raising about treacherous conditions on city streets.
Perez tweeted Tuesday night that the letter is "a public relations exercise = panic" and that Plante sent it to the media at the same time as the mayors received it.
He noted that just a day earlier, Plante had reassured Montrealers that all was being done to make streets safe, but by Tuesday was acknowledging the need for improvement.
"Citizens are not fooled," he tweeted.
In the letter Tuesday, Plante cracked the whip on mayors by telling them to keep a close eye on snow removal and report any problems like equipment breakdowns to the central city immediately.
The next five days are a window of opportunity to improve the situation before the next major snowfall, she said. That could come Saturday, when Environment Canada is calling for snow, with a high of -8 C.
"I'm counting on you to pay particular attention to operations in your respective boroughs. Over the next few days, I want every one of you to be able to show your satisfaction in the work done," she wrote.
"My expectations are very high and I will not accept, under any pretext, inadequate execution, because the population of Montreal expects, and has a right to expect, high quality services without fail on the entire territory," Plante wrote.
The city announced snow removal would resume on Tuesday evening. "The goal is to collect all the residual snow and complete de-icing operations on streets, sidewalks and bicycle paths, so that the network is completely cleared of all the remaining ice," it announced in a news release.
Opposition borough mayors denounced Plante's letter, accusing her of trying to dump the blame for poor snow removal on them.
"The mayor is clearly in panic mode after all the criticisms she's received in the past two weeks," St-Laurent Mayor Alan DeSousa said in a joint release by the opposition mayors.
"She wants to make it look as if she's doing something. But if she should blame anyone, it's her own administration," he said.
In 2015, the Denis Coderre administration harmonized snow-clearing procedures across the 19 boroughs with a goal to guarantee the same minimum level of snow clearance for residents in the 19 boroughs. mscott@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MARIAN SCOTT;The Gazette

