For a northern city that has been around for nearly 375 years, there should be no surprises when it comes to Montreal's extreme weather patterns.
Winter temperatures range from nippy to risk-of-frostbite, and our far too brief summers go from bring-a-sweater-just-in-case to scorching hot.
With temperatures expected to spike at or above 30 C over the next few days, Environment Canada has issued a heat warning for the Montreal area. With the humidex factored in, it will feel like 40 C on Tuesday and Wednesday. The heat wave is expected to last until Thursday.
The temperature reached 30 C on Monday, well shy of the record for this day - a steamy 34 C in 1987.
HEALTH RISKS DURING HEAT WAVES
Some love the heat, but extreme temperatures can pose a health risk, especially to the most vulnerable members of society.
Those at greatest risk during a heat wave include seniors, infants and people with chronic illnesses such as breathing difficulties and heart conditions.
People who work outdoors should take more breaks and stay hydrated. Ditto for those who exercise/jog/cycle.
Environment Canada advises anyone spending a good deal of time outdoors should "drink plenty of liquids, especially water, before you feel thirsty to decrease your risk of dehydration. Thirst is not a good indicator of dehydration." And it bears repeating: Never leave seniors, children or pets unattended in a car.
Temperatures usually peak in late afternoon, noted Environment Canada meteorologist Rene Heroux.
"The heat builds up during the day. Around 4 p.m. is the warmest time, usually."
However, the red-hot temperatures won't keep the Montreal Alouettes from practising outdoors this week.
"We practise outdoors even when it's hot, humid," said Charles Rooke, a team spokesman.
"The saying in football is 'If we are going to play in it, might as well practise in it.'
"We go indoors for heavy rain or a thunderstorm."
HOW TO BEAT THE HEAT WITHOUT AIR CONDITIONING
Riding out a heat wave without the comfort of air conditioning is a recipe for irritable days and sleepless nights.
But there a few things you can do to alleviate a sweaty meltdown.
Go to air-conditioned places such as shopping malls, public libraries or your local community centre.
A heat wave is also a good time to catch a movie at your local cinema, which are often as cold as ice boxes.
Afterward, catch a small bite at an air-conditioned restaurant. Most fast-food restos have AC.
If you are stuck inside a house or an apartment without AC, take a cool bath or shower. Or use a wet towel to cool off.
If you have young children, the old backyard sprinkler works wonders. But try to avoid the sun as much as possible.
HOW SOON WE FORGET TO REMEMBER THE WINTER OF 2015
Complaining about the stifling heat? Funny how that works.
A little more than six months a go Montrealers endured the coldest February ever recorded.
The city averaged a temperature of -15 C, eclipsing the 1979 record of -14.5 C. Brrr!
You might want to view the current heat wave with an eye on the Gregorian calendar: As of Tuesday, Christmas is only 128 days away.
jmeagher@montrealgazette.com
Credit: JOHN MEAGHER; The Gazette
Illustration GIOVANNI CAPRIOTTI, MONTREAL GAZETTE / Melanie Lavoie and Sandrine Cormier play in the splash pad at Parc Champetre on Monday. Keeping cool is important in summer - with the humidex factored in, it will feel like a sizzling 40 C on Tuesday and Wednesday.

