As floodwaters began to recede across the province Monday, Premier François Legault warned those hoping to restore their homes to their past splendour to think twice before doing so.
"I want to insist that people who have serious damage should seriously think about moving (out of the flood zone)," Legault told reporters while on a tour of the Mauricie town of Maskinongé, which was one of the first areas affected by spring flooding that swelled the Rivière Sud-Ouest.
In a few minutes, this year's flood became the worst recorded in the history of the province, when more than 6,000 people fled their homes in a matter of hours in Ste-Marthesur-le-Lac over the weekend when a dike breached, and water covered one third of the homes in the small town.
Legault said there is some reason for optimism, as the peak of springtime flooding has been reached.
"I want to assure people that the worst is behind us," Legault said. "For now, what's important is to take care of people and to ensure, along with the Red Cross, that everyone has a place to stay."
Public Security Minister Geneviève Guilbault warned the road to recovery will be long and challenging.
"I want to prepare people to arm themselves with patience," Guilbault told a news conference Monday. "The lowering of water levels will be slow and take time. We need to be aware of that and prepare for it."
As of Monday night, more 10,149 people had left their homes across the province, compared to roughly 4,000 in the historic floods of 2017. A total of 6,681 homes had been flooded and another 3,488 cut off from their communities by floodwaters.
In Montreal, 94 residences were flooded on Monday, 49 were surrounded by water and 55 were evacuated.
Guilbault congratulated emergency responders across the province for excellent work since the disaster began.
"It's been 10, 11 days, even more for some, that people have been hard at work day and night, day after day," she said. "Thank you, everyone."
Guilbault said the province is keeping an especially close eye on the situation in Ste-Marthe-surle-Lac, where Mayor Sonia Paulus said authorities reported a drop in water levels overnight Sunday, and some will be permitted to return to their homes on Tuesday afternoon.
Paulus said the town had been working since 2017 to reinforce the dike that failed, but had been waiting for permission from the environment ministry.
Asked about that Monday, Legault said an application was made to the Quebec government in February for work that would have been done in the fall of 2019.
Legault said the province will speed up access to funds for those who wish to rebuild their homes, hoping that it will be faster than in 2017. However, according to the new regime in place, those flooded will only get a lifetime maximum amount of $100,000 to repair flood damage. Those who wish to move will get up to $200,000 for their houses, $50,000 for the land, and compensation for their furniture, Legault said.
He added that the situation could be difficult for small towns like Maskinongé, because if hundreds take the province's offer of compensation to move away, towns will be short property tax.
"I understand that it can be almost dramatic on the finances of the municipality, so we will have to ask questions about how we can help municipalities that will be affected," Legault said. "We want to minimize damage in the long term and avoid Quebec taxpayers to pay repetitively for repairs. This is what we will figure out in the coming weeks."
In the meantime, the Bell Falls dam on the Rouge River appeared to be holding up, as water levels dipped below critical and were expected to continue to decrease over the next few days.
"It's still at 900 cubic metres per second (down from a high of 1,300 reached last week), and that's nine times the average," said Cendrix Bouchard, a spokesperson for Hydro-Québec. "We're confident it can sustain that level of pressure."
He said the order to force 50 people from their homes downriver as a precautionary measure will stand at least for the next few days.
As of Sunday, the Red Cross had taken charge of roughly 1,000 Quebecers, with about two-thirds relocated to hotels. About 100 volunteers and more than 30 staff are providing support in 11 municipalities and are monitoring the needs of 22 other communities.
The weather forecast calls for two more episodes of rain on Wednesday and Friday. The rain will be accompanied by warmer weather, with temperatures reaching 12 to 15 C on Thursday. Presse Canadienne and Jesse Feith of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/JasonMagder
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

