When the village gathers to celebrate, Michael Cameron tends to stay home.
It's not that Cameron is some sort of grinch. In fact, his default facial expression suggests he's constantly struggling not to grin.
Cameron says he doesn't like being in large crowds because of the things he has seen as a paramedic in Salluit. Of the 12 locals who took the community's first medical technician course in 2003, only Cameron remains on duty.
And in that time, he has seen things that make him appreciate the quiet moments with his wife and kids.
"I'm starting to come out of it, but it's been like this for about 10 or 15 years," Cameron said. "I've had a child die in my arms. I've seen gunshot victims, suicides, murders. At times, you're trying to be the one that's ... you're still working on the victim, but you know it's too late.
"To be the one to tell a father his two-month-old died in an accident. To be the one who they hug - whether it's a good call or a tragic one - when it's all over. It can be a lot to carry in such a small community."
In remote Salluit, the relationship between life and death is at the core of even the most banal day, Cameron says.
If you want to live here, you have to hunt. If you're going to hunt, you need to stay alive in the elements. And no one, not even the most experienced navigator, is immune to nasty weather.
Beyond his duties as the town's game warden and its chief paramedic, Cameron is the co-ordinator of Salluit's search-and-rescue team. Two years ago, he led an expedition to find a man who had wandered to the edge of town during a whiteout.
"He'd gone for a walk to get spring water and the weather turned on him," Cameron said. "He tried to brave the storm but got tired, lay down, fell asleep and never woke up again. We found him near the gravel pit at the end of the road over there."
Another young man, Steven Yuliusi, took off on his snowmobile on New Year's Eve and never returned. Cameron says he lost control of the vehicle and drove over the edge of a 30-metre gorge.
The fall destroyed his snowmobile, but somehow Yuliusi survived it.
"He was just 10 kilometres outside of town. He knows the area so he started limping home," Cameron said. "We tell our kids to never leave their machine if something goes wrong. Well, sure enough, we found his snowmobile in the ravine after just one day of searching, but it took us four days to find the body. He was three kilometres from the crash site."
In the remote Nunavik region, deaths caused by accidents are more than three times the provincial average, according to a 2015 study by the Université Laval. On average, there are 11.5 deaths per 10,000 residents compared with three per 10,000 throughout Quebec.
In Salluit, assistant town manager Barbara Papigatuk says the inherent danger of living in such an unforgiving environment binds people together.
When someone ventures onto the territory and doesn't return, the village shuts down. Businesses close, government offices are put on hold and every able-bodied adult assists in the search-andrescue operation.
That's what happened when Papigatuk's brother Frankie Ikey went missing in June 2011.
Nothing about that day suggested things would take a bad turn. It was sunny and mild, but there was still enough slush on the ground for Frankie to tow his boat to Deception Bay with a snowmobile.
He had taken his son Stas and friend Adamie Alaku seal hunting, something all of them had done dozens of times before.
"There were other boats out on the water, but they came back. Not my brother," Papigatuk said. "My brother, his son and Adamie, my brother-in-law. I lost three family members in one day."
Papigatuk was 1,800 kilometres south, studying at Concordia University, when she heard the news.
"Frankie was my best friend.
People used to think we were twins," she said. "When I found out he was missing, I had to get home."
The search parties were still scouring the northern coast when Papigatuk's flight landed in Salluit. The Canadian Rangers and locals navigated the waters in fishing trollers, calling out their names onto the Hudson Strait.
Meanwhile, the Canadian Forces flew aircraft low over the shoreline, scanning for any sign of life. Air Inuit also joined the operation, sending a plane to loop around the Labrador coast in case the boat had drifted into the Atlantic Ocean.
There had been a glimmer of hope, a few days in, when a camper said he heard one of the missing men on his CB radio. But in the end the military called off its search on June 15, one week after Frankie set out on the water. They never recovered any of the missing men's remains.
"I couldn't breathe for the longest time," Papigatuk said. "The fear of not knowing where he was or if he was dead or alive, it stayed for years. I'm calming down about it these days.
"I know he won't come home.
I'm not an idiot, I know he's gone. But I do miss him. We didn't have closure, but I'm not the only one in town who suffered like that."
Cameron lost a cousin to the sea about seven years ago. He went out in a canoe on a spring morning and never came back. In the end, the canoe washed up on shore, but Cameron never saw his cousin again.
"I always said before, to his wife and my wife, 'When he dies, I'm going to be there with him,'" Cameron said. "'We're gonna die together,'I'd say. We always did search and rescue together, we always hunted together. It was sort of a saying for me. 'If one of us goes, we're both going.'But that didn't happen.
"It's like that in the North." Two years ago, Cameron and his son were the first responders during a hunting accident that took the life of a teenage boy. He was with his cousin and they were playing with a rifle, unaware that a bullet was in the chamber when it discharged.
In the end, there was little Cameron or anyone could do to mend the child's wound.
Cameron doesn't talk about how the accident affected him. Instead, he says he worries about the child's parents and about the sweet kid who'll grow up with a sense of guilt no child should ever have to know.
"No matter who you are, whether you're a child or an elder, seeing these sorts of things, you can't just lock those memories away," he said.
There are, of course, stories of resilience and survival on the land. For every person lost to the wilderness, there are many more who were found or made their way home on foot.
A relative of Cameron's got stuck in a blizzard on his way back from Deception Bay one afternoon. To wait out the storm, he dug a shelter under his sled and kept warm.
By the time the sun came back out, he tunnelled his way out of a 10-foot snowdrift and used the reflection of his metal harpoon to signal for help.
"When you combine a person's instinct for survival with some of the knowledge that comes with living here, those are two very powerful things," Cameron said. "Like most people, I try not to go out alone. And even for a small trip, I always bring extra rations, a thermal blanket and candles in case I get stuck out there."
"To live here is to be a survivor.
That's just how it is." ccurtis@postmedia.com Twitter.com/titocurtis
THIS IS SALLUIT
Last winter, reporter Christopher Curtis travelled to the small community of Salluit in northern Quebec. This is Part 5 of a seven-part series This Is Salluit, which appears in print
April 7 to 14. April 7: Hope and possibility in Quebec's Far North
April 9: A feast for travellers on a healing journey
April 10: Harvesting food from land and sea to survive
April 11: Midwives help women give birth at home
TODAY: Search and rescue team faces down death in harsh climate
April 13: Leaving the North to go to college
April 14: A future of hope
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS;The Gazette

