As a cushion of hot air smothers southern Quebec for the third time in as many months, public health officials who have already seen heat-related deaths this year worry about managing the extreme heat and coronavirus at the same time.
As temperatures rose above 30 C this week - prompting yet another heat warning from Environment Canada - Dr. David Kaiser, the physician responsible for the environmental health unit at Montreal public health, grew concerned.
He and his colleagues had scrambled in late May when an unseasonable heat wave struck the city amid the height of the COVID-19 crisis.
A few weeks later, a June heat wave claimed several lives.
Kaiser said the hot weather in May and June prepared them for this week's stifling conditions. Protocols are now in place that help officials manage the threat of the virus and the weather, but it has been a challenge.
"There can sometimes be issues in trying to respect isolation and the measures that we want people to keep following in terms of preventing COVID, and what we know to be effective and important in the context of heat," Kaiser said. "It's easier today than it was two weeks ago."
Both the heat and the virus target vulnerable people: the elderly and those with chronic diseases. Isolated people also tend to be more susceptible to heat, but isolation is a condition imposed on some to prevent the spread of COVID-19, adding to the challenge officials face.
Montreal public health diligently counts heat-related deaths. During last month's heat wave, paramedics and hospital staff began to signal deaths they believed to be tied to the heat. But the final death tally has not yet come, Kaiser said, because the pandemic has disrupted some of the indicators officials use to determine how many people have died during a heat wave.
Usually, they look at mortality data and other indicators, checking for differences between normal periods and periods of extreme heat. This year, they can't rely on those metrics.
"We had a lot of excess deaths, unfortunately, in Montreal (this year) but also completely different patterns of use of hospitalizations, emergency rooms and outpatient visits," Kaiser said.
Right now, Kaiser thinks there have been less than 10 heat-related deaths this year in the city. He expects the final death toll to be lower than in 2018, when a heat wave killed 66 people in Montreal.
That year, the weather scorched dense urban areas, turning some into "heat islands." At the time, health officials went door to door checking on people where census data showed a higher concentration of the elderly, but the process was slow. Now, Kaiser said, they target specific buildings whose residents are more likely to be affected.
The 2018 heat wave saw temperatures hover around 34 C for six days. So far this year, the mercury has hit 30 C on eight out of nine July days. The average maximum temperature in July is just above 26 C.
Jean-Philippe Bégin, a meteorologist at Environment Canada, said temperatures will likely drop over the course of July when a new weather pattern settles over Montreal.
Though the number of persistent heat events over the past years could tempt people to connect them to climate change, he cautioned against doing so until all the data could be gathered.
"We had cool summers in the past years and people forget about it pretty easily," he said. "We need time to analyze the data to put it into context."
John Gyakum, a professor in the department of atmospheric and oceanic sciences at McGill University, said that while individual weather events may not provide a broader understanding of where the climate is going, there is a connection between the noticeable increase in the number of heat waves and climate change.
"The climate itself is changing, and what that really means is that the larger-scale global environment is acting to improve the odds for more and more of these heat waves," he said.
"With a warming climate, we should be expecting more in the way of extreme heat."
The days ahead are likely to stay hot and become even stickier. A brewing tropical storm is forcing humid air our way, bringing moisture-laden air over Montreal this weekend. Local Journalism Initiative Reporter

