Where do you go for Chinese food in Montreal? Some, ruefully, say Toronto, while others say Shaughnessy Village, Verdun or the South Shore.
The answer used to be Chinatown, the area around St-Laurent Blvd. and de la Gauchetière St., but the community has slowly faded as a destination for Chinese restaurants.
Chinatown has seen a few new restaurants in recent years, most notably an outlet of the Taiwanese international bubble tea franchise Presotea in 2018 and the upscale pan-Asian restaurant Orange Rouge.
But most of the area's more recent openings are non-Asian businesses, including La Capital Tacos, the cocktail bar Le Mal Nécessaire and the market-based small plates spot Cantine Poincaré, with its low-intervention wines and microbrews.
Meanwhile, the hipster-friendly Golden Dragon opened last spring in Brossard, joining the second outlet of Chinatown dim sum spot Kam Fung. A couple more Taiwanese bubble tea and dessert shops recently opened near Concordia University.
And in terms of savoury Asian options, Chinatown's long-standing Chez Chili (with its glass casseroles of mouth-numbing Sichuan fish in chili oil) and Mon Nan (with its moo shu pork) don't have the same foodie buzz as the reborn AuntDai on St-Mathieu St.
A new generation of Chinatown restaurateurs want to see the area restored to its former glory. At Antonio Park's recent menu launch event for Air Canada's direct flights to Tokyo-Narita, the chef and owner of Park restaurant and Lavanderia in Westmount said he has made investments in Chinatown real estate.
He has also become an ambassador for the area, along with a handful of local businesses including Dobe & Andy, where staff still cut juicy slices of crispy-skinned roast ducks and pork belly hanging in a counter display to top heaping plates of rice, bok choy and nose-tingling ginger-scallion sauce.
Open since 1982 and originally called Fung Lam, Dobe & Andy was initially located on St-Laurent Blvd.
Dobe & Andy moved in 1994 to its current diner-style setup and barbecue take-away counter at 1111 St-Urbain St., in the Édifice Place du Quartier (beneath the original Kam Fung, now called Kim Fung).
Andy and Shirley Ku's restaurant was the first to serve Hong Kong-style barbecue pork on rice, starting in 1988. Their sons Eric and Edmund Ku grew up in the restaurant, came back on board in 2011. They recently partnered with former Satay Brother Web Galman and high school friend Raymond Woo to take over after their dad and his brother Charles retired.
Andy Ku was part of a wave of immigrants in the 1970s that moved into the predominantly Cantonese-speaking area before the exodus of Chinatown's initial occupants to the suburbs. He bought a custom roaster from Toronto and started making char siu barbecue pork shoulder, crispy roast pork belly and Hong Kongstyle duck.
The trick to the duck's crispy skin is a labour-intensive process of sewing the cavities, using an air compressor to force the skin from the meat ("If ever your bike broke down, you could just bring it here and we'd pump it up for you," jokes Eric), seasoning it in five-spice, hoisin and ground bean sauce, hanging the meat overnight to dry, then roasting it. Eric and Edmund have been doing it for so long that they know the right heat by the height of the flames, rather than by temperature.
Eric, 37, and Edmund, 39, say they noticed the neighbourhood had changed when they came back to the restaurant. Now, Chinatown restaurants and other businesses are a mixture of Cantonese and Mandarin with as much Vietnamese, and a bit of Korean, Japanese and Mongolian mixed in.
"A lot of the older restaurants, the kids didn't take over," Edmund explains. "They didn't continue their legacy."
Eric adds: "I think the parents in that first generation worked for their kids to not be doing this. We kind of just fell for it - like your first love, I guess."
If Chinatown is going to thrive once again, the brothers feel it needs revitalization. They'd like to see more effort from residents and the city to make Chinatown more of an attraction, not just for summer tourists.
One step in the right direction is the third annual Asian Night Market, from Aug. 30 to Sept. 1. This year, the free festival will take place in Chinatown for the first time, as a partnership between Foodfest MTL and the Comité du Quartier Chinois de Montréal. More than 30 Chinatown vendors will participate.
Change, however, needs to start from within, Eric and Edmund acknowledge. Dobe & Andy's menu has expanded over the years, but hasn't been dramatically updated. It still ranges from $5 Hong Kong breakfasts of buttered toast with egg, ham, macaroni and coffee to ramen, stir-fries and $7.25 lunch specials, including beef stew soup with fresh noodles made at Tuck Hing on the South Shore.
They've been experimenting with lunchtime specials, though, and after throwing a few successful evening pop-up events, they're hoping to attract a younger crowd - one that likes international interpretations of Chinese food.
For example, there's sisig, made in the Philippines with a mix of pig ears and innards poached in vinegar and soy sauce, then grilled or fried and topped with calamansi lime juice, chili and onion. Dobe & Andy made a version with its Hong Kong roast pork.
"We're also looking into evening delivery and bringing in alcohol and a different vibe," says Edmund.
First, though, they'll update the décor - think old-school-meetsretro-cool diner, with the same tables, chairs and Chinese sign above the drinks fridge that says they sell Chinese buns (which they stopped selling in 2011).
"Not to scare off the regulars," Eric says. "Authenticity - I think it's a cool look."
They would also be open to a second location, probably around Guy-Concordia métro because of the student population.
"I think our price point is right for that," Eric says.
His ideal space wouldn't be a large banquet-style place like Kenny Wong, the former Greenfield Park destination where his dad worked his way up to head chef before opening Dobe & Andy.
"I don't think big works anymore," he says. "Those days are done for all cuisines. Everybody's doing little 50-, 60-seaters. It looks so much better when there's a lineup."
They'd also consider other areas of Montreal and other concepts, they add, but would stick with their bestselling roasted meats. "Keep it 'Dobe,'" Eric says.
For now, get that roast duck before the foodies descend and the guys realize they can raise their prices to more than $7.25 a plate.
CHINATOWN BEFORE THE NOODLE BOOM
Known as Little Dublin at the beginning of the 1800s, Chinatown only became Chinatown after the Irish moved to the southwest for work on the Lachine Canal and Victoria Bridge, and once the first wave of Chinese migrants came after working on the Canadian Pacific Railway.
The first Chinese restaurant opened around 1900 on de la Gauchetière St.; many more followed suit, since they were less competitive than hand laundries, which were the most popular businesses for Chinese immigrants to open at the time.
Over the years, more buildings came to serve the Chinese community; a Scottish Presbyterian church next to where Wing's Noodles Ltd. stands today became a Chinese Catholic church, and a synagogue became the Chinese hospital until 1962.
From the beginning of the 20th century to the end of the Second World War, Chinatown was known more for debauchery than for noodles. The former red light district was home to jazz clubs, strip clubs, cigar lounges and opium dens (drugs weren't regulated until the early 1900s, and it cost about $1 for a pipe), as well as tea houses and tons of restaurants. The city shut down between 300 and 500 brothels in the red light district after the war.
CREDIT: AMIE WATSON;The Gazette

