A story is told about a Japanese emperor and his party who sometime in the 17th century were lost in the mountains during a snow storm and found a small inn where they were ceremoniously treated by the innkeeper who offered them a jelly dish made with seaweed. Seaweed is a type of algae, defined as aquatic organisms capable of carrying out photosynthesis.
It seems the dish wasn't exactly to the emperor's liking and ended up being discarded. The night was cold and in the morning the innkeeper noted that the seaweed concoction had frozen. When he passed by later, it had thawed and separated into a liquid and a solid layer. Draining the liquid left a crumbly solid that to the innkeeper's amazement could be used to reconstitute a gel by boiling in water and then cooling. This gelling agent came to be known as "agar-agar," or just "agar," from the Malay term for the red algae from which it is derived. Agar is widely used in Asian cuisine for jellied desserts and can also be found as a thickener in soups, jams and ice cream. It is essentially a vegetable analogue of gelatin, and is acceptable in vegan cuisine.
After the introduction of the germ theory of disease by Louis Pasteur in the 19th century, researchers began to take great interest in culturing bacteria in the lab. In 1882, German microbiologist Walther Hesse introduced agar as a medium for growing bacteria while working as an assistant in the lab of Robert Koch who would go on to win the Nobel Prize for identifying the causative agents for tuberculosis, cholera and anthrax.
Supposedly Hesse got the idea after he had noted his wife's use of agar to thicken a soup that retained its consistency even after extensive boiling, which was not the case with gelatin-based thickeners. Gelatin had been previously used as a growth medium for bacterial cultures but it had a tendency to liquify as the temperature increased. In an agar medium, however, microbes could be cultured at higher temperatures, making it easier to determine which bacteria were susceptible to heat and which were not. Agar's application in microbiology, and its introduction to the U.S. as a food-gelling agent increased demand for the substance. Since it was mostly supplied by Japan, when the Second World War broke out, western countries had to look to their native seaweeds for extracting agar. These mostly turned out to be unsatisfactory but they did yield other useful gelling agents such as the alginates, carrageenan and furcelleran.
Today, commercial agar, composed mainly of a polysaccharide called agarose, is produced by a technique similar to the one that led to its original discovery, namely boiling then freezing seaweed. A number of novel uses include as an impression material in dentistry, modelling clay for children, fertilizer in organic farming and as a diet aid. The latter is based on agar's ability to absorb water and leave the dieter with a feeling of fullness.
While agar is obtained from a specific species of red seaweed, other types of "macroalgae'also have commercial importance. A different red seaweed is being explored as an additive in cattle feed with a view toward reducing methane emissions. When cows digest their food, they belch large amounts of methane, a gas that makes up about five per cent of total greenhouse gases. Bromoform, a naturally occurring component of some seaweeds, can reduce emission by interfering with the function of enzymes in the cow's rumen that lead to the production of methane.
What about seaweed as a food for humans? There are some 10,000 species of seaweed with a diversity of flavour and nutritional properties. Although sometimes called a "superfood" by marketers, the vitamins and minerals found in seaweed are readily available from other plant products. The dried sheets of nori, used to make sushi, weigh so little that they are inconsequential in terms of nutrition. Some people enjoy snacking on seaweed wafers which are actually low in calories and sodium, making them preferable to chips or crackers. The taste of seaweed is largely due to naturally occurring glutamate, the same substance that people are concerned about when it is used as an additive (monosodium glutamate) in foods. Indeed, MSG was first isolated from seaweed in 1908 by Japanese biochemist Kikunae Ikeda.
While there appear to be no reports of adverse reaction to glutamate in seaweed, there is some concern about its iodine content. Iodine is essential for thyroid hormone formation, but too much can cause the same symptoms as deficiency, including goiter, which is an enlarged thyroid gland. Most people have no problem applying "moderation" to seaweed consumption.
Finally, powdered agar dissolved in hot water can be poured into a mold to form a thin layer of a solution that is then frozen, thawed and air dried. The result is a film that is being explored as a possible biodegradable substitute for plastic packaging. You can even eat it. joe.schwarcz@mcgill.ca Joe Schwarcz is director of McGill University's Office for Science & Society (mcgill.ca/oss).
CREDIT: Joe Schwarcz;Special Montreal Gazette

