Roxane Paradis stood in line outside the old Hôtel Dieu Hospital for an hour Sunday as the weather shifted back and forth from sweltering heat to downpour.
She went to a pub last week and, after reports of COVID-19 outbreaks in several Montreal-area bars since they reopened earlier this month, Paradis wanted to err on the side of caution.
"My table was still wet from disinfectant and there were wooden dividers between booths, but I work with the public so I want to be safe," said Paradis, a grocery store cashier. "I don't have any symptoms but I want to be sure I don't have coronavirus and pass it on to someone vulnerable."
She was also following the advice of Montreal's public health officials, who recently called on anyone who's been to a bar since July 1 to get tested for COVID-19.
"There are at least five bars in Montreal which have reported cases of COVID-19 among patrons or staff, and we've identified eight people who have been infected," said Dr. David Kaiser, an official with the city's public health department.
"We know there are probably more cases ... and we want to get out in front of this before we find ourselves dealing with a second wave."
Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante reiterated Kaiser's advice Saturday, tweeting that everyone who has been to a bar since July 1 should get tested.
Though the number of daily cases is a far cry from what it was at the height of the pandemic in April and May, there are nearly 60,000 confirmed cases in Quebec and more than 5,600 deaths attributed to the coronavirus.
Last week, in the Montérégie region, a spike in coronavirus cases was attributed to two large house parties and a bar that allowed patrons to break social distancing rules. More than 20 of 60 attendees at a house party tested positive for COVID-19, according to Dr. Julie Loslier, the region's public health director.
Paradis, who wore a mask like just about everyone in line at the testing centre Sunday, said it's regrettable some people aren't respecting public health guidelines. Throughout most of the pandemic, her only contact with her parents was to drop off groceries for them and speak at a distance.
One bar employee who stood in line Sunday said she saw the public notices about testing and wanted to be safe. Her colleagues are doing the same.
"Bar workers are taking the guidelines seriously, it's encouraging," said the woman, who did not want to give her name for fear of drawing negative attention to her place of work. "But some customers would come in and say, 'This is the fourth bar we've been to tonight.'That's not the best idea in the middle of a pandemic."
It will take a few days to determine if a spike in Montreal cases can be linked to the reopening of bars, but Sunday at Hôtel Dieu, a queue stretched around the building and into the parking lot. Most of those in line appeared to be in their 20s and 30s.
Anyone who needs to be tested can call 514-644-4545.

