You can put away those winter tires, if you haven't done so already, because the seasonal forecast for Montreal is calling for warmer spring weather.
"No more snow," Andre Cantin, a meteorologist for Environment Canada, declared triumphantly.
"I would say it's over in Montreal for the snow."
Hardly a bold prediction following Sunday's sunny high of 22 C, a teaser for the outdoor terrasse weather that awaits Montrealers in the coming months.
For the record, Sunday's high fell short of the record of 25 C, set in 1960, but Cantin said it's not unusual to see those kind of hot daily temps in April in Montreal.
Cantin pointed out that the record high for April 18 is 28.3 C, set back in 1976, while the hottest April 16 on record was a blistering 29 C, set in 2012.
Brett Anderson, a meteorologist with AccuWeather, sounded hopeful that warmer weather was on its way.
"The cold is behind us, warmth is ahead of us," he said." But I think we're looking at more up and down temperatures for the remainder of April."
Although the spring weather has been soggier than usual, Anderson is predicting warmer, drier weather.
"As we get into the rest of April and into May, dryness will be more common across the region.
"With a drier weather pattern, I think temperatures especially in May, will be clearly above normal," said Anderson, who pointed out that dry weather could lead to an increased risk of forest fires in northern Quebec during the hot summer months.
"Definitely, I'm concerned about wildfires. I think it could be another big season in the northwest of Quebec. If it stays dry, you know how it can be in parts of Quebec, there could be more fires than normal."
Due to a mild winter, Cantin said flooding was not a concern in many areas around Montreal this spring.
"There was not enough snow around Montreal this year for flooding, " Cantin said.
"There were a few threats in the Laurentians and northern part of the Outaouais, and south of Quebec at Riviere Chaudiere.
"But it melted slowly and there was not a lot of rain to make it flood."
Asked if Montreal had seen its last snowflake for some time, Anderson was careful not to make any such prediction.
"I never say that, because you never know what can happen, " he said. "Sometimes things change quickly."
jmeagher@postmedia.com
Credit: JOHN MEAGHER; The Gazette