Dr. Horacio Arruda offered a stern warning to Quebecers Friday as the province continued to loosen social distancing restrictions: respect the rules or we'll all spend the summer in lockup.
Arruda, Quebec's director of public health, said things are trending in the right direction: there were 65 new COVID-19 deaths Friday, 646 additional cases and hospitalizations are slightly down. As the death toll creeps toward 4,000 in Quebec, he said the situation is "stabilizing."
But, he said, Quebecers cannot afford to get complacent.
"If we go back to the way things were before, all those people who died, it will have been for nothing," said Arruda. "Because it will be as though we didn't learn from their deaths."
Quebecers are now allowed to gather outside in groups of up to 10 people from up to three households. Starting next week, about 300 museums and cultural centres across the province, as well as drive-in movie theatres, can begin to reopen. Meanwhile, other non-essential businesses are starting back up in Montreal, and with a summer heat wave descending upon us, it stands to reason there will be crowds at parks and public places.
"There will be more cases (of coronavirus)," Arruda said. "We're under no illusion. ... But we'll be monitoring hospitalizations, the number of people being admitted to an intensive care unit and deaths, if that rises to an unacceptable level again, we'll be forced to lock ourselves inside.
"We won't wait for things to get too bad before making that call. If we see a trend, we'll take action."
Even as the daily death toll drops, the number of cases could continue to rise as Quebec works its way toward the goal of testing 14,000 people a day for coronavirus. Right now about 11,000 are tested daily, and as of Thursday evening there are 46,141 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the province, including 3,865 deaths.
The provincial government is also working with Ottawa to set up contact tracing in Quebec. As many as 50 per cent of those with COVID-19 are asymptomatic, but by tracing who these people were exposed too the government can better predict and prevent outbreaks.
"We'll accept any help we can get ... we'll co-operate with Ottawa to integrate them into our testing strategy," said Geneviève Guilbault, Quebec's deputy premier.
Montreal's public health director, Dr. Mylène Drouin, said the city should be able to contact at least 500 people a day within the next 48 hours as part of a contact tracing strategy. There have been delays in securing federal aid because the province needs French-speaking workers to work the phones.
Though other provinces, like Alberta, had developed an app that uses the GPS location tracking on a person's phone to determine where they've been and how they may have spread the virus, Quebec's technology has lagged behind. An early contract tracing system would have used chain emails to trace the pandemic's exposure in a community.
That plan has since been scrapped.
This week, Premier François Legault said he's open to working with a Montreal-based artificial intelligence firm to develop a mobile app for contact tracing. The app would have to track people's movements without violating privacy rights, he said.
As summer comes within reach, Quebecers have been inundating the government with questions about camping sites and sleepaway camps, according to Guilbault. She said they are studying whether it will be possible to open camp grounds and summer camps.
"The risk of transmission at a summer camp where people sleep and eat in close quarters would be higher than if we reopened schools," Arruda said.
Day camps will be open as of June 22 across the island, the government announced earlier this week. And libraries across the province will be able to start lending out books on May 29, but access to the facility itself will be restricted.
As some social distancing measures loosen, the city and province are handing out hundreds of thousands of free masks to Quebecers and urging them to wear the face covering whenever they leave their home. But even with protective equipment, Guilbault said people will have to "adapt to new social norms" and keep their distance.
"We know it's hard," she said.
"But the temptation to take short cuts now could cost us big later."
As for gatherings in backyards, Arruda said Quebecers will have to discipline themselves to act against their own impulses.
"I know how it is, you're next to the barbecue with your brother, drinking a beer," said Arruda. "But you can't hug him, you can't touch him. I know it's against our nature but it's what we have to do. ... If you see someone coming too close, tell them to back off. They won't get mad. Tell them Dr. Arruda told you to say that." ccurtis@postmedia.com

