After months of consultations, the City of Montreal unveiled its new snow-clearing policy on Friday, one Mayor Denis Coderre believes will have an immediate effect on citizens this winter.
For the first time since Montreal was merged with surrounding suburbs in 2002, a single policy will dictate how the city reacts to snowstorms.
"You won't have 19 different policies, you will have one. That harmonization will change the culture of the way we are working. I think it will have immediate impacts on our quality of life," Coderre said at city hall.
The process began in January after a report by the comptroller general cited a lack of equipment and manpower in Montreal to handle winter conditions.
The goal of the new policy, Coderre said, is to guarantee the same minimum level of snow clearance for residents in the 19 boroughs.
The biggest change is the central city will now determine when a snow-removal operation is to begin.
Once that decision has been made, which can occur even after a storm of only 10 centimetres, all boroughs will have 12 hours to begin removing snow.
To expedite work during storms - spreading abrasives, plowing and removing snow - the city has categorized its 35,000 streets and divided them into three priority groups.
Major arteries, as well as bus routes, school zones and commercial areas are in the first category, making up 25 per cent of streets. Another 15 per cent are in the second group, which includes streets with four-season bike paths and commercial sections. The remaining 60 per cent are the city's residential streets.
Once a snow-clearing operation begins, boroughs will have 36 hours to clear all streets in the first category, with a maximum of four days for a storm of up to 20 cm.
Boroughs that fail to meet the time frame to begin snow removal will see a reduction of two per cent in their snow-removal allotment from the city, which translates to between $500,000 and $1 million depending on the borough. The city's total budget for snow removal is $155 million.
"That will make it impossible to try and save money on the backs of citizens," Coderre said. "There is no question regarding budget, the money is there."
One of the biggest complaints last winter was the city's handling of snow-covered and icy sidewalks, something the policy addresses.
After more than five centimetres of precipitation accumulate, salt and abrasives are to be spread on sidewalks in the first two groups within four hours and within a maximum of eight hours in the third group.
In the event that freezing rain is in the forecast, abrasives are to be spread on sidewalks and streets with a five per cent grade before the storm hits and the application will resume once the freezing rain starts.
Boroughs that will incur additional costs because of the new snow-clearing standards will see their budget allotment adjusted from the central city, the mayor said, adding all boroughs will also be obliged to use the city's INFONeige MTL application so residents can be better informed when snowstorms hit.
"The big winners in all this are the citizens," said Anie Samson, mayor of the Villeray-St-Michel- Parc-Extension borough and vicepresident of the Executive Committee.
"It will save time because we will have standards for everyone in Montreal," she said, adding now they know it will take a maximum of four days to clear a storm of 20 centimetres.
Before, clearing that storm could take longer because various boroughs would start clearing operations at different times.
kmio@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/kevmio
BY THE NUMBERS:
1 city
19 boroughs
28 snow elimination sites
239 average snowfall, in centimetres each year
3,000 employees responsible for snow removal
4,100 kilometres of roads in Montreal
6,550 kilometres of sidewalks
140,000 tonnes of salt, abrasives used annually
300,000 trips taken by trucks removing snow
1,698,062 citizens in Montreal
12,000,000 cubic metres of snow transported annually
$155,000,000 city's annual budget for snow removal
Credit: KEVIN MIO; Montreal Gazette

