The fate of the Pioneer bar in Pointe-Claire could be decided Wednesday night when city council convenes to hear an appeal of the demolition committee's decision to raze the 117-year-old building.
Another large turnout is expected for the 7 p.m. public meeting at the Holiday Inn and Suites Hotel in Pointe-Claire where arguments for and against the Pioneer's fate will be heard.
At stake is the Pointe-Claire Village's history and it's future, according to demolition critics who accuse Mayor John Belvedere of forsaking the city's built heritage to pave the way for luxury condos that would drastically alter the character of a village that predates Canadian federation.
But for others, the Pioneer has become a public eyesore in the heart of the village. The building, the city argues, bears little heritage value or physical resemblance to the original Hotel Charlebois (later the Pointe-Claire Hotel). Although Belvedere said he wasn't a "condo guy" during last year's municipal election, he has embraced the Lakeshore Rd. condo project as a means to revitalizing the village's commercial sector.
The demolition committee approved the Pioneer's demolition at an Aug. 9 meeting. However, the committee rejected the reutilization plan/condo project based on concerns about parking issues related to the city's decision to sell an adjacent parking lot to the condo developer for $730,000.
The city cannot issue a demolition permit to the developer until a replacement project for the site has been approved.
Belvedere said both the demolition of the Pioneer and the reutilization project have been appealed. He said parking lot concerns will be addressed at Wednesday's meeting, but said the city remains on board with the condo project.
"The developer didn't have to come back with a different plan; he had to come with basically a plan as to how he'd manage the site during construction," he said. "And we had to come back with a plan to compensate for the parking we'd lose."
As for the turnout expected for Wednesday's meeting, the mayor said, "The people who are against it will come out and people who are for it won't."
Emotions ran high at a 6.5-hour meeting Aug. 9, especially after the demolition committee, comprised of councillors Paul Bissonnette, Eric Stork and Brent Cowan, announced it stood by a recent architectural assessment of the Pioneer (paid for by the developer) which concluded the building should be torn down because it had lost much of its heritage value since its construction in 1901.
Andrew Swidzinski, a vice-president of the Société pour le Sauvegarde du Patrimoine de Pointe-Claire, also caused a stir when he presented the committee with an independent evaluation of the parking lot that appraised its value at $1,150,000, more than $400,000 above what the city agreed to sell it for.
After, Claude Arsenault, former head of the SSPPC, accused the city of holding a "fire sale" of municipal property.
"Why would the city sell a key parking lot on Lakeshore Rd. to a developer for such a low price, so he can build a condo that no one in the village wants?" Arsenault posited.
But Belvedere has steadfastly maintained the condo project falls within the guidelines set out in the city's Village Code. Belvedere has also pointed out no one offered to buy the Pioneer before the condo developer moved in.
But a local buyer, Paul Parfett, emerged to say he would buy the now-shuttered Pioneer and restore it to its former glory if the present deal with Montreal developer Greg Koegl falls through.
Tim Thomas, owner of an antique shop on Cartier Ave., said there is much more at stake than saving an old bar that served as a watering hole for generations of West Islanders.
He said the construction of a "monster " condo project will signal an end of the village's unique history and charm.
"It will mark the beginning of the end for the village as we know it."
Michel Forest, head of the SSP-PC, issued a statement last week in which he sharply criticized the demolition committee's decision.
"Taking into account that more than 400 people were not able to influence the vote of the demolition committee last August, the SSPPC is asking the question: how many citizens votes will be needed to finally hear their request (to save) a heritage building and preserve the spirit and soul of our village?" Forest said the will of the people should prevail, especially when an overwhelming number of citizens oppose the condo project.
The Fédération Histoire Québec (FHQ), an umbrella group of 275 heritage, historical and genealogical organizations representing 55,000 members across the province, recently wrote to the city, asking it to halt its demolition plan.
"The meeting of Aug. 9th, which gave rise to a strong citizen participation, leads us to ask ourselves: Who owns the city: the promoters, the municipal council or the citizens?" wrote Clément Locat, head of heritage for the FHQ. Jmeagher@postmedia.com
CREDIT: JOHN MEAGHER;The Gazette

