The people who lost their homes to a dike collapse in Ste-Marthe-surle-Lac last month will be allowed to rebuild.
Mayor Sonia Paulus said Monday she believes a new, taller and stronger dike will be strong enough to beat back the Lake of Two Mountains when its waters swell each spring. Paulus says repairs to the current dike were completed Sunday and the situation on the ground is stabilizing.
The city should be done pumping water from its streets by Thursday, according to the mayor. As of Monday morning, roughly 5,000 people remained displaced by the flood.
News of progress on the dike and pumping efforts may be encouraging to the residents waiting to return home. But those same people, many of whom had to flee their homes and outrun the cascading water, want to know how the wall was breached and whether a new wall will hold.
"If we're going to go back, we need to know exactly what went wrong," said Alexandre Cordeau, who lived in the worst-hit sector of Ste-Marthe at the time of the flood.
"Who was inspecting the dike? Was it an engineering technician? A blue-collar worker? The mayor while walking her dog? The more we know about the process of inspecting the better we'll feel going back."
Cordeau, a quality-control inspector, doesn't know the extent of the damage to his home. His house is among the 125 that were "sacrificed" and left underwater so the city could contain flooding that displaced 6,500 people.
It may be that when it's time for Cordeau, his wife and their oneyear-old daughter to consider moving back home, their property will need to be torn down and rebuilt.
When he bought his house three years ago, he assumed the structure keeping it above water was stable. Since it failed, Cordeau has been trying to get his hands on old inspection reports to get a sense of whether the disaster could have been prevented.
One recommendation from a 2009 report - which concluded there had been significant damage to the dike - outlines measures the city should take to ensure the wall holds firm. The report states that the city needed to implement "surveillance measures" to assess the structure's quality.
Cordeau says he think the question of whether the city bears any responsibility in last month's breach may hinge on the quality of those surveillance measures.
"If it turns out the city is clearly at fault here then I would consider joining a class-action lawsuit against (Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac)," Cordeau said.
"A lawsuit would likely be long and no one should expect to get rich out of it. But if there is negligence and there is a way of recouping some of our losses, then a lawsuit may be the right course of action."
A group of about 500 Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac residents met last week to discuss launching a class-action lawsuit against the city. They are expected to file suit within a few days, according to plaintiffs reached by the Montreal Gazette.
The dike was inspected after severe flooding in 2017 but the quality and frequency of those inspections remain unclear. This fall the city was scheduled to begin repairs on 3.5 kilometres of dikes, some of which date back to 1976.
Now that work will be far more extensive.
The part of the structure that crumbled last month was a "natural dike" - a mound built of grass and clay. A new version of the dike would be taller and could be reinforced with concrete.
Asked whether he thinks he should even rebuild in a flood plain, Cordeau said he's willing to take that chance.
"With the right structure in place, with the right inspection protocols in place, I think it can work," said Cordeau, whose family is living with relatives at the moment.
"The worst has already happened. They'll watch the dike, if there wasn't a good inspection program they'll have one now. You don't want a second flood like this in 2020 or 2022 and Ste-Marthe isn't the only city built on a flood plain.
"Maybe it'll happen again in 40 years or maybe they'll make the modifications they need to make. But this is our home and for a lot of people, this is it, this is all they have. My wife and I are young and we can start over. Many people can't.
"So, for a lot of people, what other choice is there? We have to rebuild." ccurtis@postmedia.com Twitter.com/titocurtis
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS;The Gazette

