1. This year, Montrealers learned that between 2017 and 2023 a new park will be created - one of the largest on the island. The parkland has been used in the past as: a) railway yards near Cote-St-Luc b) the Miron Quarry and waste disposal site c) the Longue Pointe military garrison d) a pair of golf courses on Ile-Bizard e) the location of east-end petroleum refineries
2. The Montreal indie band Half Moon Run has a new album titled Sun Leads Me On. What helped the band members come together? a) an ad on Craigslist b) an impromptu show in a Mile End bar c) a meeting in a Verdun restaurant d) a shared class at Concordia University e) a Facebook posting
3. Which former leader of Quebec's student protest movement won a Rhodes Scholarship in 2015? a) Gabriel Nadeau-Dubois b) Leo Bureau-Blouin c) Yalda Machouf-Khadir d) Martine Desjardins e) Dave Turcotte
4. TransCanada Corp. said it has decided not to build its Energy East pipeline to Cacouna, near Rivieredu-Loup on the St. Lawrence River, because: a) The price of oil doesn't justify the investment b) It can ship oil by tanker from ThunderBay c) Environmentalists strongly opposed the project d) Donald Trump owns a chalet near Cacouna e) It had vastly underestimated the construction costs
5. One of the Montreal Canadiens' top four defencemen is Jeff Petry, who was acquired at the trade deadline in March 2015. In return, the Canadiens sent: a) Brandon Prust to the Vancouver Canucks b) A third-round draft pick and Louis Leblanc to the Buffalo Sabres c) Jiri Sekac to the Anaheim Ducks d) Peter Budaj and Patrick Holland to the Winnipeg Jets e) A second-round pick and a conditional fifth-round pick to the Edmonton Oilers
6. Why did the city of Montreal dump billions of litres of raw sewage into the St. Lawrence River? a) To facilitate work on the Champlain Bridge b) To circumvent new federal rules about waste treatment c) To repair a major sewer system and relocate a snow chute d) To evade new provincial rules about the size of sewers e) To provide fresh sediment for the St. Lawrence Seaway
7. The proposed redevelopment of which property in downtown Montreal has caused a major architectural controversy? a) Sun Life Building b) Montreal General Hospital c) Hall Building (Concordia University) d) Maison Alcan e) Atwater Library
8. A forestry agreement signed in July 2015 halted a $180 million Cree lawsuit against the government of Quebec. Which group immediately objected to the settlement? (Bonus question: Who was paid $500,000 to act as a mediator between the Cree and the province?) a) an Innu First Nation b) Resolute Forest Products Inc. c) the city of Saguenay d) the federal government e) the Xtrata mining company
9. In the first four months of 2015, how much snow fell in Montreal? a) 82 cm b) 104 cm c) 141 cm d) 177 cm e) 205 cm
10. The borough mayor of Verdun, Jean-Francois Parenteau, came under fire in November for sending out a text message claiming: a) that a 14-year-old boy was badly injured at a local skateboard park b) that Islamist extremists have taken over a local mosque c) that Pauline Marois has never set foot in Verdun d) that Verdun has the lowest crime rate in all of Montreal e) that many residents of Nuns' Island hate being part of Verdun
11. In December 2015, the Outremont borough council voted to prohibit new houses of worship from being set up along which streets?
a) Lajoie, Van Horne and Ducharme b) Cote-Ste-Catherine and Maplewood
c) Hutchison and Durocher d) Laurier, Bernard and Van Horne e) St-Joseph and Cote-Ste-Catherine
12. Bombardier Inc.'s troubled CSeries regional jetliner received a setback when: a) A test flight set for September was postponed b) Ottawa refused to allow passenger jets to fly out of Toronto's Billy Bishop Airport c) A Kazakhstan airline cancelled a major order for C-Series planes d) Its Brazilian rival, Embraer, said its new jet was about to enter production e) The company revealed new details of its debt restructuring
13. Which Quebec filmmaker directed the video for the worldwide hit song Hello by the British singer Adele?
a) Philippe Falardeau b) Jean-Marc Vallee c) Xavier Dolan d) Louise Archambault e) Francois Girard
14. In April, Cirque du Soleil's creator Guy Laliberte: a) Sold control of the Cirque to Texan and Chinese equity funds b) Persuaded the Caisse de depot et placement to take a majority stake c) Signed Celine Dion to perform at the Cirque's Las Vegas shows d) Said the Cirque would open a new venue in Dubai e) Required all executive staffto wear a red clown nose for a day
15. Quebec's Ministry of Transport has announced a five-year plan to demolish and eventually rebuild which major element in Montreal's road network?
a) Metropolitan Expressway b) l'Acadie Circle c) Mercier Bridge d) Ville Marie Tunnel e) Turcot Interchange
16. The West Island municipality of Baie-d'Urfe has decided to rename a park after which local athlete? a) P.K. Subban b) Rhian Wilkinson c) Eugenie Bouchard d) Patrice Bernier e) Marc-Olivier Brouillette
17. Former nursing students of McGill University donated $16,500 to clean and restore a statue of whom? a) James McGill b) Queen Victoria c) Heather Munroe-Blum d) Pierre Elliott Trudeau e) Lord Strathcona
18. On Nov. 19, Gregory Woolley was arrested in Montreal. He is: a) the treasurer of a road construction company b) a former fundraiser for the Conservative Party of Canada c) a convicted fraud artist in Florida d) a former bodyguard for Hells Angels leader "Mom" Boucher e) a professor of English at the University of Toronto
19. A new arena opened in Quebec City in September, in hopes of attracting an NHL franchise. What is the name of the new arena?
a) Centre Videotron b) Centre Quebecor c) Centre Pierre Peladeau d) Centre Jean Beliveau e) Colisee Pepsi
20. Who won the Hugh MacLennan Prize for Fiction at the Quebec Writers' Federation annual awards? a) Heather O'Neill, for her story collection Daydreams of Angels b) Trevor Ferguson, for his novel The Storm Murders c) Neil Smith, for his novel Boo d) H. Nigel Thomas, for his novel No Safeguards e) Elaine Kalman Naves, for her novel The Book of Faith
21. Bill 88 was introduced in the Quebec legislature in December. It will: a) Offer a tax rebate on electric cars b) Allow renewable energy producers to sell directly to consumers c) Expand the sale of Quebec-made wine, mead and cider in grocery stores d) Require condominium developers to provide daycare space e) Create a crown corporation to build a deepwater port on Ungava Bay
22. The commission on wrongdoing in Quebec's construction industry, led by Judge France Charbonneau, released its final report in November. But the co-commissioner dissented from a major finding of the report. What is his name?
a) Renaud Lachance b) Tony Accurso c) Michel Samson d) Ken Pereira e) Michel Deziel
23. Quebec filmmaker Denis Villeneuve had a major success in Hollywood this year. Which movie did he direct?
a) Wild b) Spotlight c) Congorama d) Sceptre e) Sicario
24. Pierre Karl Peladeau won the leadership of the Parti Quebecois in May. Who finished second in the race?
a) Jean-Francois Lisee b) Martine Ouellet c) Alexandre Cloutier d) Bernard Drainville e) Gilles Duceppe
25. One of the most popular music acts in Quebec in 2015 was a bilingual singer who goes by the stage name Coeur de Pirate. What is the singer's real name?
a) Ariane Moffatt b) Louis-Jean Cormier c) Beatrice Martin d) Bobby Bazini e) Mitsou Gelinas
26. Even before Canadian policy toward refugees changed with the election of Justin Trudeau in October, which Montreal agency had already brought in at least 650 refugees from Syria over the previous two years?
a) Hay Doun b) the Roman Catholic Archdiocese c) l'Universite de Montreal d) the Montreal presbytery of the United Church e) the Islamic Centre of Quebec
27. A Montreal-born actor plays a significant role alongside Saoirse Ronan, Jim Broadbent and Julie Walters in the new film Brooklyn. Who is this actor?
a) Jessica Pare b) William Shatner c) Jacob Tierney d) Charlotte Le Bon e) Rachelle Lefevre
28. In 2015 which of the following restaurants was the victim of an apparent arson attack?
a) Cafe Empire on Jean Talon St. b) Tikka et Grille in Dollard-des-Ormeaux c) Mediterraneo in St-Laurent d) Queue de Cheval on Mountain St. e) all of the above
29. The 2015 Rogers Cup saw most of the world's top-ranked male tennis players compete at Uniprix Stadium in Montreal. In the final: a) Roger Federer defeated Rafael Nadal b) Andy Murray defeated Novak Djokovic c) Rafael Nadal defeated Andy Murray d) Novak Djokovic defeated Roger Federer e) Milos Raonic defeated Stan Wawrinka30.
To what city did Montreal comedian Sugar Sammy announce he would be moving in 2016? a) Los Angeles b) Mumbai c) Paris d) London e) New York
31. In May, APTN announced that a TV series set in Kahnawake would be renewed for a third season. What is the name of the series?
a) Mohawk Girls b) Medicine Woman c) The Sharing Circle d) By the Rapids e) Club Native
32. In how many games did defensive end Michael Sam play for the Montreal Alouettes?
a) 1 b) 2 c) 4 d) 8 e) 16
33. This year, Montreal conductor Yannick Nezet-Seguin had his contract extended until 2021 as music director of two different orchestras. They are: a) Philadelphia Orchestra and Scottish Chamber Orchestra b) L'Orchestre Metropolitain (Montreal) and Philadelphia Orchestra c) Metropolitan Opera (New York) and Berlin Philharmonic d) L'Orchestre Metropolitain (Montreal) and London Philharmonic e) London Philharmonic and l'Orchestre symphonique de Montreal
34. Which unit of a Montreal university was put on probation by a national body for failing to reach many important standards? a) Faculty of Law, McGill University b) Faculty of Medicine, McGill University
c) John Molson School of Business, Concordia University d) Ecole Polytechnique, Universite de Montreal e) Faculte de science politique et de droit, Universite de Quebec a Montreal
35. When Laval-based Valeant saw its stock price fall because of regulatory issues, Bill Ackman, a major hedge-fund investor: a) Sold off$3.3 billion worth of Valeant stock b) Attempted to take over Valeant's board c) Said his Pershing Square fund was through with pharmaceuticals d) Said female libido drugs boded well for the future of Valeant e) Bought two million more shares of Valeant
36. In 2015, the video games Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six Siege and The Mighty Quest for Epic Loot were developed by which Montreal company?
a) Ubisoft b) Beaver Nuts c) Eidos d) Ludia e) Warner Bros.
37. Quebec writer Samuel Archibald was shortlisted for the Giller Prize thanks to a book of stories named after the town where he grew up. What is the name of the town and the book?
a) Rimouski b) Sept-Iles c) Asbestos d) Arvida e) Trois-Pistoles
38. The fortunes of the Montreal Impact soccer team took a dramatic turn for the better in August after the team signed: a) Didier Drogba (Ivory Coast) b) Evan Bush (United States) c) Ignacio Piatti (Argentina) d) Hassoun Camara (France) e) Patrice Bernier (Canada)
39. Each year, the National Trust for Canada publishes a list of the 10 most endangered buildings in the country. Which local landmark made the 2015 list?
a) Van Horne warehouse on Van Horne Ave.
b) Hopital de la Misericorde on Rene-Levesque Blvd. E. c) Redpath House on Ave. du Musee d) Montreal Children's Hospital (former location on Tupper St.)
e) Notre Dame du Vieux Moulin convent, Pointe-Claire
40. In 2015 the Woman of Outstanding Distinction Award, presented each year by the Women's Y Foundation and YWCA Montreal, was given to: a) Suzanne Fortier, principal of McGill University b) Melanie Joly, minister of Canadian Heritage c) France Charbonneau, judge and head of the Charbonneau Commission
d) Louise Fre'chette, former Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations e) Phyllis Lambert, founder of the Canadian Centre for Architecture
Credit: The Gazette
Illustration RYAN REMIORZ, THE CANADIAN PRESS / A sign warns about contaminated river water after a fall sewage dump.

