It seemed like the bright yellow markers from my snow removal contractor had only just appeared at the end of my driveway when the white stuff began to fall. At the first growl of the tractor engine my daughters ran to the window to watch our plow driver Hoover up the snow and blow it off to the side.
"When I grow up, I want to do that," my nine-year-old sighed.
I was a little surprised. But as she explained why, I began to understand. The plow driver helps people for a living, she said. The work is important and meaningful. Also, driving a tractor looked like fun.
One of the great privileges of sharing your life with little people is the way they can help us see the world with fresh eyes.
With snow in the forecast for most of the next two weeks, I wanted to take a moment to show a little gratitude to the women and men who will be out working through flurries and fierce blizzards so life doesn't have to stop when it storms.
It's hard and often thankless work, with long and uncertain hours. And it's the kind of service that is easy to take for granted when it's done well. Most of us only think about the plows when the drifts deepen and we start to wonder why our roads and driveways aren't clear yet.
Well, I suppose we can't all be the first to have our driveway plowed. I am grateful I get to pad around the house in fuzzy slippers instead of stomping outside to go shovel the driveway every day before leaving on errands.
I count myself lucky to have inherited a reliable and responsive snow removal contractor. When we bought our home, we just carried on using the same service the sellers had used. It's harder when you're unhappy with the service you have, or if you're moving into a home where the previous owner preferred a DIY approach.
If you're in the market for snow removal, there's no way around it: you need to talk to your neighbours. Unlike other services, snow removal contractors tend to work in very specific areas. Likely your only options are the companies that have staked out territory on your block, so screw up your courage to knock on some doors. Likely your neighbours will be happy to either rant or rave about the service and pricing they get from their contractor.
When it comes down to it, the quality of your town and home's snow removal service has a lot to do with how happily you can make it through Montreal's long winters. When the weather outside is frightful, the plow drivers'hard work lets us enjoy the seasonal pleasures that make winter delightful.
CREDIT: BRIANA TOMKINSON;The Gazette

