As a veteran journalist who covers the Philadelphia Flyers' home and away games, Tim Panaccio is no stranger to Montreal, or the treachery of its sidewalks. He even bought a pair of winter boots at an Aldo store during a recent stopover to manoeuvre the downtown streets.
Unfortunately, his boots were no match for the conditions on his last visit. Leaving the L'Atelier d'Argentine steak house on Crescent St. on Thursday, Feb. 18, the night before the Flyers would fall to the Habs, Panaccio hit a patch of ice as he strolled toward Ste-Catherine St. His ankle rolled over and he broke two bones and tore several ligaments. He took a cab to the Glen site of the McGill University Centre Hospital, an experience he characterized as "enlightening."
"That was an ordeal," he said.
"The doctor didn't have enough help. Boy, you don't have enough people there."
They put him in a cast and told him he would require surgery. He did not cover the hockey game.
A week after the incident, Panaccio's ankle is still so swollen he will have to wait another week before surgeons can operate. He could be out for up to eight weeks. Workers' compensation regulations don't allow him to work while he's recuperating.
"This is a very significant setback for me," said Panaccio, a fit 63-year-old who worked out every day, until his accident. He has lost five pounds since the fall. "I could miss the entire playoffs."
Panaccio's misfortune is far from unique, particularly in this winter of frequent rain followed by freezing temperatures, in a city where sidewalks often remain covered in ice for days.
"'It's an orthopedic bonanza," Montreal family physician Ashok Oommen said on CJAD news talk radio station Thursday after the latest bout of freezing rain. For older residents, the effects of breaking a limb or hip can be catastrophic.
A study by Montreal's public heath agency and the Universite de Montreal looking at the number of outdoor winter falls in Montreal and Laval in the winter of 2008-2009 showed 960 people were transported by ambulance to hospital in the space of two months, an average of 16 a day. Nearly three quarters reported slipping on ice or snow. Those figures don't include the injured, like Panaccio, who didn't use an ambulance to go to hospital.
There are multiple reasons why removing ice remains a perennial issue, city officials say. They include the amount of time it takes to clear thousands of kilometres of sidewalks, inadequate equipment, and a cocktail of rapidly evolving climatic conditions that can make it hard to keep up.
Westmount resident Emile Fattal, who has made improving the state of the city's sidewalks a personal mission for the last four years, says the heart of the problem is actually much more simple: cities and boroughs are skimping on spreading salt on the sidewalks to save money, forcing pedestrians to walk in the salted streets. He has contacted officials at cities and boroughs like Westmount, Ville-Marie and Cote-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grace to ask why they can keep streets and bike paths clear but not sidewalks. He has been told abrasives like gravel are more effective on ice-covered sidewalks.
"Abrasives are not a substitute for salt." He said. "Salt the bloody sidewalks. Apply the same criteria as you do on the streets."
Cities prioritize streets because they need to ensure two-tonne vehicles don't slide out of control and kill people, said Cote-des-Neiges -Notre-Dame-de-Grace Mayor Russell Copeman. But he concedes sidewalks remain an issue.
"As a mayor, it's not as though I'm happy we're having trouble clearing our sidewalks," he said. "But there are real technical constraints to doing so."
Foremost is the amount of time it takes to clear the 400 kilometres of sidewalks in his borough - roughly six to eight hours, by which time the first sidewalks to be cleared may be covered again in snow or slush that changes to ice. Many sidewalk-clearing machines have blades that are too wide for narrow sidewalks. Smaller tractors with shorter blades lack the power to clear ice. Salt becomes less effective below minus 6 C, and boroughs prefer to use less of it for ecological reasons, Copeman said, and because it often gets washed away by the rain.
Boroughs can go back to icy sidewalks when conditions improve, but Copeman admits that limited budgets play a part in that decision.
"It's not impossible, but we do it with a certain amount of parsimony," Copeman said. "If it were an easy problem to fix, people much smarter than I would have found the solution."
Citizens can and have sued Quebec cities for falls on icy sidewalks, but they have to prove the city has been negligent. While some have won, like the 69-year-old Montreal North grandmother who won $25,000 after a sidewalk fall in 2007, most do not, Protegez-Vous magazine reported. The city of Montreal was not able to provide details on lawsuits by Friday.
MUHC emergency room physician Dr. Frederic Dankoffnotes international studies have shown rain followed by freezing temperatures are the most hazardous weather conditions when it comes to falls, contributing to twice as many injuries as snowfalls. Injuries typically peak in the first days of an ice storm and then jump again four to eight days later as people get back to their regular lives. Ankles are the main victims, followed by wrists, backs and skulls.
"We try and tell people unless its really necessary, avoid going out," Dankoffsaid. "And if you have elderly family members, see if they need groceries or medicine and go get it for them."
Panaccio's mishap has not changed his opinion of the city.
"I still love Montreal," he said.
Upon hearing the number of injuries related to falls each year, he said: "If that's the case, you've got a real problem."
As for Panaccio, he told his wife he was going to have to buy a new set of boots.
rbruemmer@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/renebruemmer
Credit: RENE BRUEMMER; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA / A woman regains her balance as she walks gingerly over a patch of ice at Jeanne-Mance park during a moderate snowfall in Montreal on Wednesday. Snow followed by rain, and then freezing rain makes for treacherous conditions for pedestrians.

