Re: "U.S. toilet paper use wiping out our forests?" (NP Montreal, Feb. 26) On behalf of Canada's forest sector, I am responding to false statements made in the recent story on toilet paper use in the United States and the impact on Canada's forests.
The report produced by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) used words like "devastating" to describe how American toilet paper use is affecting Canada's boreal forest. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Canada plants more than 615 million trees annually and has professional foresters and scientists who manage our forests to ensure wildlife habitat, biodiversity and water protection.
This is why Canada does not have problems with deforestation and illegal logging seen in other countries. It is concerning that the NRDC suggests alternative wood fibre sources that are more carbon-intensive or sourced from countries with much lower forest management, labour and human rights standards.
Here are some important facts about Canada's forests:
Every single tree harvested in Canada is replanted, by law.
Canada has retained over 90 per cent of its original forest cover and has almost zero deforestation (0.01 per cent).
The Canadian government's State of the Forests Report (2018) confirms that the forested area under active management in Canada continues to be a carbon sink of 20 million tonnes.
The boreal is thousands of years old, but trees in the boreal only live for 100 years. By harvesting before they succumb to pests, fires or simply falling over, we realize economic and environmental benefits by replanting.
Younger forests absorb more carbon than older ones.
Canada has the most third-party certified forests in the world, meaning consumers can rest assured that products from our forests are produced from environmentally responsible and sustainable practices.
Canada's approach to forest management brings environmental, social and economic benefits to our country. We plan to keep it that way.
Derek Nighbor
president and chief executive officer, Forest Products Association of Canada, Ottawa
CREDIT: DEREK NIGHBOR;The Gazette

