During Tuesday night's snowstorm in Montreal, 300 vehicles - and their occupants - were stuck on the lanes of southbound Highway 13 for close to 14 hours.
On Wednesday morning, hundreds of cars were still jammed on the highway, which reopened at noon. A massive towing operation could be seen from an overpass of the Cote-de-Liesse expressway overlooking the highway.
One of those trapped overnight was Andre Soulard, a driver for the delivery company ICS Courrier. He said he slept in his car after getting trapped in the exit ramp for the westbound Cote-de-Liesse expressway from the northbound Highway 13. His colleague, Jose DeSousa, was also stuck in his delivery truck.
"I got stuck at 6:30 last night and just got out now," Soulard told the Montreal Gazette at about 9 a.m. while walking on the sidewalk of the expressway's service road. "I'm lucky that my colleagues came to bail me out. The truck is still stuck there."
Relatively speaking, Ed Garcia was one of the lucky ones. He only spent six hours overnight Tuesday to Wednesday marooned on the southbound lanes of Highway 13, rather than the 12 to 14 hours many other motorists had to endure after an accident at the 520 exit shut down the entire stretch of the road between Highways 40 and 20.
The 45-year-old Garcia's ordeal began at about 8:30 p.m. Tuesday when, returning home to N.D.G. from work, he turned off Highway 40 and south onto Highway 13, which was already a parking lot because of the accident.
However, that essential information wasn't spelled out by the roadside signs that Transport Quebec uses to update local traffic conditions.
"You know that digital billboard?" he told the Montreal Gazette Wednesday morning. "It said 'Highway 13 south, incident at Highway 20.' Then it said 'Highway 13 south, exit 520 closed,' when it should have said 'Highway 13 south closed at exit 520.' " Whatever the billboard's problem with details, Garcia realized something was up two kilometres after he exited the 40. "I just stopped.
"I was stuck at the end of the (Montreal-Trudeau) airport runway just about the whole time."
Garcia says he "listened to the radio, listened to the hockey game" to pass the time. "I'm pragmatic. There was nothing else you can do."
However, luck was on Garcia's side in the form of a canteen truck that was stuck right alongside of him.
"He just opened up for business," he said. "At about one in the morning, someone knocked on his window and asked if he took Interac. I was second in line and by the time I turned around there was a line of 20 people at least and others were walking toward him from down the highway."
As it appeared his gas gauge was getting too low, Garcia said he finally cut his engine at 2 a.m., "just in case."
But about 30 minutes later, traffic, at least that section of it Garcia found himself in, started to move.
"Someone decided to uncork the exit for Cote-de-Liesse inside the tunnel," he said. "Within four minutes I was through the exit. Everything moved very orderly, everyone just wanting to get the heck off that highway."
But Garcia noted that when drivers stuck south of the exit realized what was happening, "people were making U-turns and driving in reverse to get back up to the exit. It was horrible."
Garcia said he's disappointed provincial police didn't give drivers the option of backing up onto Highway 40, and said in the six hours he was stuck on the highway he didn't see a single police officer. Once traffic started to move, he added, some drivers had clearly fallen asleep while others hurriedly pulled out their shovels because they'd become stuck in the still falling snow as well as the traffic.
"Only 10 minutes before we started rolling, I saw the first snowplow heading north on Highway 13."
Thirty minutes later, Garcia was walking through the front door of his home. "That's how empty the rest of the streets were."
Those who were towed were surprised to see that they were fined and ticketed for blocking the highway.
That's what happened to Mark Taddeo, co-owner of Chateauguaybased Newfi Transport. One of his truck drivers got stuck on the highway and spent the night in his cab. After being towed off the highway, the towing operator, Burstall Conrad, charged him $900 to get the truck back.
"We had to pay it, to get our truck back," Taddeo said. "We're obviously going to contest that."
Transport Minister Laurent Lessard said people charged for towing will be reimbursed by the province. Burstall Conrad could not be reached for a comment on Wednesday. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/JasonMagder Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist James Mennie of the Montreal Gazette contributed to this report.
Credit: JASON MAGDER; The Gazette
Illustration PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Safety crews and Surete du Quebec officers on snowmobiles work to clear up Highway 13 near Cote-de-Liesse expressway on Wednesday following the snow storm.

