Even now, I can't listen to the Kinks'unhinged rendition of Got Love if You Want It without smiling at the thought of how hard my friend Dave Riley and I worked to get it into our record collections.
We became Kinks obsessives in the early 1970s and began excitedly hoovering up the group's back catalogue, working the music-outlet delete bins, department stores and even grocery retailers. (Yep, I actually found The Kink Kontroversy and Face to Face for $2 apiece at my local Dominion, in a rack near the candy bars at the checkout.) Most of all, Dave and I seemed to live at the used-record mecca Cheap Thrills on Bishop Street.
But we had a problem: The Kinks'self-titled 1964 debut album, as released in Canada, was missing the aforementioned song, an explosive cover of the Slim Harpo blues classic.
It was common in that era for releases by British bands to be quite different in the U.K., the U.S. and Canada, with songs being dropped or added to fit marketplace dictates. Our holygrail Kinks track, as it happened, was on the U.S. version of the album, retitled You Really Got Me.
With home computers, Amazon and Discogs not even imaginable to us, there was nothing to do but search the second-hand racks with the tiniest glimmer of hope, on the infinitesimal chance that some progressive-rock zealot had decided to unload his beatgroup collection and we would strike gold.
It never happened. Sometimes the for-sale ads in the back of fanzines such as Who Put the Bomp offered a lead. And that's how, after a seeming eternity of blistering my fingers flipping through the racks, I finally emerged victorious. It involved a trip to the post office, a money order and a long wait, but I ended up with a used, somewhat battered copy of You Really Got Me, with someone's name scrawled on the back cover.
In hindsight, the hunt had been even more exciting than that moment when I placed the tonearm on the record.
I have plenty of other stories about searches for hard-to-get vinyl albums, including Frank Zappa's Shut Up 'n Play Yer Guitar, the soundtrack for the 1967 film Privilege, with those unforgettable songs by Paul Jones, and Miss Butters by the Family Tree, a pre-Wackers band featuring Bob Segarini and Bill (Kootch) Trochim. But I can't think of a single pursuit of a recording that brought me more pulse-quickening moments than that Kinks quest.
More than 40 years later, though, it feels as if I'm making all this up. Got Love if You Want It appears to have been restored to every available edition of that debut album, and I find no evidence online that there was ever a version without it.
And if I rhapsodize about the song to anyone now, they can reach into their pocket for the phone, search for the track, put it in their library and tell Siri to play it on the way home in the car. Sometimes it feels as if streaming services have made a complete mockery of all my years of hard work.
How much do I resent all that? Not a lot, as it turns out. Changes in the music business and life in general ultimately have made the road to streaming pretty easy on me.
I have watched many people of my generation stop listening to most new music after the 1980s. The precious communal experience of rock 'n'roll became more difficult to keep alive in adulthood. For many, music stopped being their ubiquitous life soundtrack at parties, on the radio and everywhere friends gathered.
In the end, it simply stopped playing such a big role for them and became a more occasional and solitary pursuit.
The oppression of too much music was the second nail in the coffin for some. As home technology became easily accessible and the internet offered a more democratic forum for musicians, everyone who thought they had an album in them could get it heard more easily, by more people.
That was a blessing: no longer could record companies, retailers and radio programmers be the sole judges of who you get to hear. The days of there being a handful of important music releases every week we could all agree on would never come back.
But abundance was a curse, too.
Niches proliferated as audiences became hopelessly fragmented. And even putting aside the obvious quality control issues, no one could absorb even all the big-buzz albums. When it was actually my job, as the Montreal Gazette's music critic, to try to keep up with everything, I found there weren't enough hours in the day.
True to the rules of economics, a flooded market began to make the art seem less valuable.
As if technological liberation and musical inflation weren't enough, streaming services have brought the ability to acquire instantly anything you want to hear - or anything you even have a passing thought about - for nothing. And that further cheapened the currency of music. Finding that more-obscure-than-thou album no longer offers a challenge, satisfaction or credibility.
Even at Spotify Premium rates (commercials would be a deal-breaker for me), I have, more or less, the universe of sound for $11 a month. I spent more than that on all those Elton John B-sides that didn't turn up on albums.
But while I feel bad for a generation that will never experience the thrill of the hunt, I'm definitely not the cranky old guy asking these kids to get off my lawn. In fact, I paradoxically have become the happiest resident of a world that allows me to sit back on the couch and use my phone to flip between How Glad I Am by Nancy Wilson (the jazz singer, not the Heart guitarist), the West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band's psychedelic debut, some early Paul Revere and the Raiders sessions I had heard only on 8-track tape, Can's Monster Movie, the outof-print soundtrack for the Ravi Shankar documentary Raga and Janelle Monáe's Dirty Computer.
And I had no idea I so desperately needed the feature that keeps track of my tastes and helpfully provides a weekly playlist of things I should check out. When you're pointed to a deep-catalogue Turtles track, how long is it going to be before alarm bells go off and you realize that you've never actually heard the full Western Union album by the Five Americans? It's a click away. For the occasional album that can't be found on Spotify (there aren't many, in my experience), other streaming services generally come to the rescue.
With streaming, I'm also being quasi-successful in keeping a one-time storage-space crisis - which led me to unload a large portion of my vinyl and CD collections over the years - under control. I still buy physical discs by a few artists to whom I feel a strong sense of loyalty, such as Paul McCartney, Bob Dylan, Eels and Nick Lowe. There's an exception for lavishly packaged deluxe reissues of important albums, too. But the flood of jewel boxes and digipaks into my home has largely abated.
In the scope of all this, I don't want to dismiss the serious issue of equitable payment to artists by streaming services, which is highly problematic. Nor do I have any interest in debating sound quality with audiophiles (I'm not one). And I'm not blind to a major Achilles heel that comes with streaming: the random, though seemingly infrequent, disappearance of tracks - even entire albums - when permission to use is withdrawn by rights holders. Roy Budd's beyond-cool soundtrack to the 1971 crime drama Get Carter, for example, was in my library one day, gone the next. Will the Kinks be there indefinitely? Still, I tend to evangelize about streaming - not blindly, but strictly as an insatiable music consumer.
In the end, having such unprecedented musical access has deepened and broadened my interests. Phone pointed at my sound system, I sometimes find myself free-associating into the wee hours, creating new playlists and adding to old ones - some of which last longer than a drive to Maine - and fretting that I'll still be at it as it gets light outside.
Maybe there's not a world of difference between the pop nerd of yesteryear and the modern-day version. The geekery simply has moved from the discontinued-record bins to the iPhone. I still seek out pop esoterica all the time. It's just that now, the process only takes a few seconds.
But I have to admit, there are times I miss the waiting. bperusse@gmail.com
CREDIT: The Gazette

