I popped in to meet the new owners of La Chaumiere de L'Anse on a recent short hop to Tremblant and found the BB still is at the top of its game.
Martin Menard and Man Li have made the leap to innkeepersas second careers and have lucked into a darling inn with a great location.
La Chaumiere is nestled into a forest less than two kilometres from the Tremblant resort, adjacent to the Tremblant cycling path and at a stop for the local shuttle bus. Deer gambol through the woods and big blue jays feed on the patio. The tableau of a peaceful country getaway is complete.
I felt at home at La Oolong tea and cookies. And Zoe, the couple's big, sweet German shepherd, sChaumiere de L'Anse in five minutes. The fireplace was blazing in the living room. Li served at at my feet, hoping for a rub.
(Doggie note: Zoe schmoozes with guests only if she's invited to do so, and after one pat, she is your loyal BFF. She is so gentle she once saved an injured bird, carrying it to the house, just as retrievers do. Still, we have to admit there are fewer deer in the neighbourhood than before she arrived).
Menard and Li are a dynamic couple. They met a few years ago on a Vancouver-to-Montreal flight when she was returning from a family visit in her native city of Wuhan in China, which has a population of 14 million. He was a sales rep who boarded more than 100 flights a year.
They started out in Montreal, but Menard is a country boy at heart, so he's happy to be stoking the fire, removing snow, landscaping, doing maintenance and even housekeeping. Bed and Breakfast: La Chaumiere has five guest rooms, all with a classic Alpine look - hand-painted armoires, antiquestyle dressers and petit-point rugs over beautiful knotty floors. The colours, different in every room, are soothing tones like saffron, sky blue, sage, antique blue and rose. Botanical prints and vintage landscapes brighten the walls.
Menard and Li share the cooking and present their morning menu on a small blackboard. She prepares freshly baked croissants and copious fruit salads with big bowls of yogurt.
He is an enthusiastic cook whose specialties include: scrambled
eggs with smoked salmon, bacon or sausage; thin French crepes or French toast with maple butter and maple syrup. The omelette Chaumiere - his piece de resistance - is filled with ham, cheese and onions.
And Menard makes his own blueberry, strawberry and raspberry jam.
"You have to try the jam - the recipes are from my mother and grandmother!" He is proud of his family's production of maple syrup and maple butter at La Cabane du Bois a Sucre Vercheres on the South Shore, which is a consistent winner at professional tastings.
It's a welcoming place, with a coffee corner on the landing and a mini-fridge in each room with soft drinks, at no charge. The breakfast portions are generous and Li will wrap up a snack for the road of anything you could not finish, like croissants or fruit.
Tremblant in summer: The ski lifts will operate April 9 and 10, and again April 16 and 17. Golfers can tee up at the scenic Le Geant as of May 20 and Le Diable courses, from May 13.
At Lac Tremblant, there will be beach life, swimming and rentals of canoes, kayaks, paddleboards, pontoon boats and motorized craft.
The picturesque paved Tremblant cycling path runs up and down through the woods, for eight kilometres from the mountain resort to the village, passing La Chaumiere de L'Anse. That trail links with the Linear Parc of the P'tit Train du Nord at Place de la Gare, the old train station, now an art gallery and farmers' market.
Taking cycling up a notch, two major cycling happenings dominate the Tremblant calendar for May. VeloMotion presents the 22nd Quebec /Canada Cup Mountain Bike Series (May 20-23), races that draw top athletes for downhill and cross-country, as well as fun for everyone, like yoga for cyclists and guided tours. The Gran Fondo Mont-Tremblant (May 27-29) is a series of road-biking races from 45 to 160 kilometres, which includes a sunset ride and socializing.
It will be a remarkable summer of pop culture and sporting events, with almost all events free, at least for spectators. Here are the majors: Subaru Ironman 5150 Mont-Tremblant on June 25; Subaru Ironman 70.3 Mont-Tremblant on June 26; Tremblant International Blues Festival from July 8-17; Rythmes Tremblant from July 22-31; Wanderlust Festival (fees apply) from Aug. 11-14; Mont-Tremblant Half-Marathon on Aug. 14: Subaru Ironman Mont-Tremblant from Aug. 19-21; Fete de la Musique from Sept. 2-5; Tremblant Gourmand (fees apply) from Sept. 10-18.
I F YOU GO
La Chaumiere de L'Anse: 819-681-0770, lachaumieredelanse-quebec.com; 107 chemin de l'Anse, Mont-Tremblant.
Price: $118-$138, Sun.-Fri., or on Sat. $138-$158, for two, including breakfast, Wi-Fi, beverages.
Tremblant Resort (events): tremblant.ca, 888-738-1777. Tourism Tremblant area: 877-425-2434, mont-tremblant.ca.
Credit: ROCHELLE LASH; The Gazette
Illustration PHOTOS: LA CHAUMIERE DE L'ANSE / La Chaumiere de L'Anse is a charming four-season BB close to the Tremblant resort and the cycling path.; / Warm interiors and generous breakfast portions give La Chaumiere de L'Anse in Tremblant a homey feeling.

