Seriously? They're naming the Champlain Bridge replacement the Samuel De Champlain Bridge. They must have thought long and hard on that one.
And once the span linking Montreal to the South Shore opens on June 30, it will be known as .... the Champlain Bridge. Much like the Honoré-Mercier Bridge is pretty much only known as the Mercier Bridge.
The "Samuel De" will be dropped by motorists faster than the first pileup and first dropped hubcap on the new bridge.
Almost lost in the naming of the new bridge on Wednesday by Infrastructure Minister François-Philippe Champagne was the fact that it was actually slated to open Friday. Yes, the first day of winter. Brilliant.
For the record, the weather forecast for early Friday is freezing rain.
One can only imagine what kind of calamitous opening that might have made. We should probably be grateful for the sixmonth delay, unless higher powers decide to unleash anger on us by unloading hail and locusts from the skies on our vehicles June 30.
With all due respect, the feds, under whose domain the bridge falls ... er ... rests, could have gone a lot more creatively in seeking to pay homage to French explorer Champlain. Samuel II? Le Sam? Sammy the Sequel? Super Sammy? Then again, the latter could have been misconstrued for Sugar Sammy, which, in consideration of some of the more farcical aspects of our bridge traffic, might have been entirely appropriate.
And what about some other pioneers? Paul Chomedey de Maisonneuve is a mouthful, and he already has a boulevard named for him. But while Jeanne Mance has a street named for her, the founder of the Hôtel-Dieu in 1644 - the first hospital in North America north of Mexico - merits more.
But, in truth, if they were to name the bridge for an original Quebec inhabitant, that honour should really go to an Indigenous pioneer, whose people had been established here thousands of years before Champlain or Jacques Cartier ever hit these shores.
Perhaps Donnacona, the Iroquoian chief who took offence when Cartier erected a cross in the Gaspé in 1534.
Better still, let present-day Indigenous leaders make the call on whom they would wish to have that honour.
The feds could have gone outside this controversial box altogether and named the new structure for one of the many influential Montrealers from the worlds of sports, arts, science or politics.
Few would argue against the Jean-Béliveau Bridge, a tribute to one of the classiest Habs of them all. Such a name might even induce a breakout of good manners and etiquette on the span. Right! But one can always dream.
The Rocket, named for the greatest Canadiens stick-man of all, Maurice Richard, would also have been a nice touch, save for the fact it would imply speedway when we all know that it would be the exact opposite with gridlock being the norm.
Similarly, the Gilles-Villeneuve Bridge would have sent the wrong message, and the lategreat FI driver already has the Circuit Gilles-Villeneuve named for him. The Boom-Boom-Geoffrion Bridge, while also an interesting choice, would have ended up hitting too close to home on the collision front.
If the feds really wanted to quell fears about the bridge's support structure, they could have done worse than name it for legendary Québécois strongman Louis Cyr, the pride of St-Cyprien-de-Napierville who died far too young at 49 in 1912.
Turning to the arts, Lise Payette or Nelly Arcan could have been considered.
Honestly, though, who better a bridge-builder than Leonard Cohen, loved and respected as much by francophones as anglos? Oscar Peterson could also fill the bill on that front.
From the world of science, there is physician/microbiologist Armand Frappier, who devoted much of his career to battling tuberculosis.
And can't forget Pierre Dansereau, considered to be a "father of ecology," which, of course, would make for a rather incongruous choice for a bridge honour.
And then there's the political spectrum, which would have taken eons to decide upon. It's hard to imagine there would ever be consensus in choosing to name the bridge for either Robert Bourassa, Jean Drapeau, René Lévesque, Claude Ryan or Pierre Elliott Trudeau.
I would have been partial to Louis-Alexandre Taschereau, the 14th premier of Quebec and the namesake for the Brossard boulevard some of us have to exit in order to avoid the traffic chaos on the Champlain Bridge - and, doubtless, on the new Samuel De Champlain Bridge. bbrownstein@postmedia.com Twitter.com/billbrownstein
CREDIT: BILL BROWNSTEIN;The Gazette

