"A hospital must not only render the most efficient service to the sick; it must have a heart as well. St. Mary's is that hospital." - the late Georges Gauthier, Archbishop of Montreal
The elimination of vascular surgery from St. Mary's Hospital is the latest in a series of administrative decisions to strip the 91-year-old institution of a wide range of clinical, diagnostic and teaching activities that cast doubt on its future as a community hospital.
Viewed in isolation, each decision might not appear to threaten St. Mary's. But taken together, they represent an undeniable downsizing of a venerable institution with a long history of medical achievements, say longtime employees. "It's death by a thousand cuts," said Dr. Gerald van Gurp, a St. Mary's physician who has worked in the hospital's ER for four decades.
Unlike most of his professional colleagues, the 65-year-old van Gurp was willing to speak on the record to the Montreal Gazette because he doesn't fear reprisals as he is semi-retired and now works only one day a week in St. Mary's emergency follow-up outpatient clinic. "I'm perplexed. There are a number of studies and surveys of patients that show that St. Mary's comes out on top or near the top on all sorts of parameters, especially patient satisfaction, and in terms of efficiency and cost-effectiveness," he added.
"Yet it's a paradox that St. Mary's is bearing the brunt of all these cutbacks."
Among the services that have been curtailed at the McGill University-affiliated hospital in Cotedes-Neiges: [broken bar][broken bar]Last February, administrators suspended St. Mary's psychology internship program and the entire psychology department has since been abolished, although no official announcement was made internally to inform hospital staff. The program served more than 150 patients in psychological distress, including those who were suicidal, and was a training ground for PhD students from four universities, including McGill and Concordia. [broken bar][broken bar]Last May, the hospital eliminated its surgical outpatient clinic as part of $8.3-million in budget cuts. The clinic's closing forced patients to see their doctors outside the hospital, impeding timely access to postoperative tests and procedures at St. Mary's.
The hospital's comprehensive automated lab - which has consistently received the highest accreditation by the American College of Pathologists since 1995 - is being ordered under a Montreal-wide reorganization to reduce its volume of specimen analysis, among other tests.
In July, St. Mary's sole vascular surgeon, Carl Emond, had his privileges revoked to perform emergency vascular surgery, which administrators deemed was now "eccentric to the mission" of the hospital. The decision was made without informing the ER staff.
On Nov. 2, an ER patient died after he was denied vascular surgery at St. Mary's that might have saved his life. The ER staffonly became aware that Emond's privileges had been revoked after he informed them in the "crash room" next to the unconscious patient, who was then transferred by ambulance to the superhospital of the McGill University Health Centre. The patient died before he could undergo surgery to repair a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Last fall, the on-call spiritual counselling service to patients was cancelled. The service is no longer available after 4 p.m. on weekdays and weekends.
Staffare concerned about a lack of succession plans to make sure that specialists are hired to replace those who are retiring. St. Mary's has two respirologists who are 65
and 70 years old, respectively, and it's not clear at this point whether there are definite plans to hire and train specialists to replace them when they retire.
"St. Mary's is being dismantled," said a veteran physician at the hospital, who did not want his name published for fear of losing his job.
St. Mary's - which serves one of Canada's most ethnically diverse districts, including immigrants from 100 nations - no longer has its own executive director or board to defend its interests following an administrative reform imposed by Health Minister Gaetan Barrette last April 1. The hospital is now being managed by bureaucrats - some of whom, stafflament, have never set foot in St. Mary's - who work in Pointe-Claire at the newly-created Montreal West Island Integrated University Health and Social Services Centre, known by its French acronym, CIUSSS.
With so many services scaled back or cut, rumours are running rampant among staffand patients that St. Mary's will soon be closed.
Joanne Beauvais, Barrette's press attache, denied in an email last November that the hospital will be shuttered.
"Nobody in the cabinet nor in the MSSS (Ministere de la Sante et des Services sociaux) has heard of this rumour," Beauvais said at the time. "So it is a rumour, and is absolutely not in the minister's or the MSSS's intentions."
Beauvais stood by those comments in an email Tuesday to the Montreal Gazette, saying: "That position is not only still valid, but I could also provide you with a list of pending projects that are underway, such as the enlargement of the building, that would demonstrate the CIUSSS's and our government's intention is absolutely not to change St. Mary's mission as a community first-and second-line care hospital."
Claire Roy, head of public affairs for the West Island CIUSSS, conveyed a similar message on Nov. 26: "St. Mary's will continue to exist as a community hospital. This was never called into question, in fact, the contrary. The current mission of St. Mary's is essential and it represents a pillar in the 'construction' of our CIUSSS. St. Mary's is undeniably a part of our future with its current mission. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for contacting us to allow us to rectify a rumour that is absolutely unfounded." aderfel@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/Aaron_Derfel
FROM J. F.K. TO SHATNER: SOME OF ST. MARY'S MILESTONES
Here are a few milestones in the history of St. Mary's, a 271-bed hospital: 1924: St. Mary's is founded in the Shaughnessy mansion on Rene Levesque Blvd. (Today, the former mansion is part of the Canadian Centre for Architecture.) 1930: Dr. Donald Hingston sets out to raise one million dollars to build a hospital to serve Montreal's Irish-Catholics. In spite of the Depression, the Irish community generously supports Hingston's campaign. In 1934, St. Mary's takes up residency at its current location on Lacombe Ave.
1958: John F. Kennedy, a U.S. senator at the time, and his wife Jackie attend the St. Mary's Ball to help raise funds for the hospital.
1998: During the ice storm, St. Mary's provides shelter to more than 900 people, serving more than 2,000 meals.
2003: St. Mary's becomes the first hospital in Quebec to run a fully automated lab.
2008: St. Mary's wins an environmental award, Making Medicine Mercury Free, by a U.S. organization.
2011: St. Mary's becomes the first hospital on the island of Montreal to obtain the "Baby Friendly Hospital" accreditation. The accreditation is part of an international program that focuses on 10 conditions for successful breastfeeding, formulated in 1991 by UNICEF and the World Health Organization.
2014: Actor William Shatner, a.k.a., Captain Kirk, collaborates with St. Mary's on a video explaining a technology developed by St. Mary's researchers to be used in space exploration missions. Shatner provides the voice-over for the video.
Aaron Derfel, Montreal Gazette
Credit: AARON DERFEL; The Gazette
Illustration DARIO AYALA, MONTREAL GAZETTE / "There are a number of studies and surveys of patients that show that St. Mary's comes out on top or near the top on all sorts of parameters," said Dr. Gerald van Gurp, a St. Mary's physician who has worked in the hospital's ER for four decades.; ST-MARY'S HOSPITAL FOUNDATION / John F. Kennedy and his wife Jackie attend the 1958 St. Mary's Ball while he was senator of Massachusetts.

