It's back to the drawing board for the promoter behind the proposed Boise Pearson residential development in Senneville. Public opposition to the plan presented during a consultation earlier this month was strident.
"We listened to what people had to say and council has decided changes need to be made," Mayor Jane Guest said, Monday. "The plan, as it is now, is too big. Council will meet the promoter over the coming weeks to look at the new plans and another public consultation will take place sometime in August."
Resistance to the development of the triangle of land near Highway 40 and west of Blvd. des Anciens-Combattants reaches back almost 25 years.
Guest told the Montreal Gazette that she is hoping this plan will end up being adjusted and approved before the civic elections, Nov. 5. If not, the project could find itself floating in limbo until the next administration takes a look and makes a decision. Guest has announced she will not be running for a second term.
When promoter Jacques Belisle bought the land, he planned to build luxury, single-family homes, but the town wanted 80 per cent of the wetland and forested area conserved. The plan presented earlier this month had four condo buildings with 224 units.
Senneville resident Martin Gauthier is an outspoken critic of the development. His property on Elmwood Ave. backs onto the land in question. How people will access the development from an already busy adjacent thoroughfare, the bump in population of around 500 and efficient drainage in the wake of construction are Gauthier's main issues.
He watched with horror this spring as the wetland near his home became saturated. The flooding came within metres of his property.
"Drainage is a serious issue," Gauthier said. He said that even if the wetland isn't touched by the construction, the introduction of structures and parking facilities will interfere with the flow of groundwater. It has to go somewhere.
Boise Pearson's urban planner Marc Perrault told the Montreal Gazette that the plan includes what are called bioretention basins, which are essentially landscaped depressions that channel storm water run-off to shallow basins where it is released in a controlled fashion.
Perrault said 70 per cent of the trees will remain untouched and 10 per cent will be replanted.
Senneville has a population of around 920, with leafy streets and generous properties. People are drawn to its quiet, village feel. Gauthier said the high-density development does not reflect the village image.
"There will be a 55-metre buffer zone between the homes on Elmwood Avenue and the (nearest) building," Perrault said. "We have aimed to find a good balance between conservation and development."
Perrault said a new intersection with a traffic light would be forged on Blvd. des Anciens-Combattants to allow access to the development. The portion of the boulevard in question is part of Senneville. The rest of the boulevard is in Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, which has its own plans to develop a piece of land nearby.
"The boulevard is already very stressed," Gauthier said. "Something like 3,000 cars use the boulevard every day." kgreenaway@postmedia.com
Credit: KATHRYN GREENAWAY; The Gazette
Illustration An artist's illustration of the first draft of the design for the proposed Boise Pearson development project in Senneville.

