Warning: Readers may find the language and ideas quoted in this story disturbing. For nearly two years, a Montrealbased chat room became a forum for young white men to share violent, racist fantasies with each other.
They spoke about starting a race war, "gassing" Jewish people and one user joked that he would participate in a mass shooting. The Montreal Storm chat room, created by the influential Montrealbased neo-Nazi Zeiger, began in August 2016 and appears to have been deactivated last winter.
The Montreal Gazette recently obtained a cache of 12,000 encrypted messages from the group. Experts say while most of the chat room's 48 users will probably never move from talk to realworld violent actions, their online activity shouldn't be dismissed as idle chatter.
Maxime Fiset, a reformed neo-Nazi, works to deradicalize people who've drifted into extremist ideologies.
"You can only go so far into that mindset without becoming violent," said Fiset, who works for the Centre for the Prevention of Radicalization Leading to Violence.
A common thread throughout the encrypted chats is that its users are lonely, bored and admit to feeling like outcasts. Some open up about their mental health problems and thank their "brothers" for supporting them through difficult times.
Fiset says the support these users get from Montreal Storm members might be contributing to their radicalization.
"These guys all consider themselves victims," he said. "So for them to band together in some unsupervised space, it's not going to create some support movement like Alcoholics Anonymous.
"It's the complete opposite. It's like putting a bunch of alcoholics together in a bar. They're not going to get better."
Ryan Scrivens is a researcher at Concordia University who specializes in right-wing extremism. He says groups like Montreal Storm present a dilemma.
"The vast majority are keyboard warriors, they're saying terrible things, but they're just venting," said Scrivens, a post-doctoral fellow. "I'd much rather they have these spaces online than in the real world.
"However there is that percentage that one of them could be the next (Alexandre) Bissonnette."
Bissonnette, the Quebec City mosque shooter, frequented farright websites and forums in the months before he murdered six people in their place of worship last year.
"We know (Bissonnette) was trolling, we know he was shitposting. I've spoken to people who know him who confirmed this to me," Fiset said. "Shit-posting" refers to the practice of flooding social media with offensive, racist content in an ironic fashion.
One of the challenges of determining the significance of the chat room messages is the alt-right's use of irony. The alt-right - an umbrella term used to describe the new generation of online white nationalists - is known to use humour to soften the edges of extremist ideology.
"They don't want us to know when they're serious," Fiset said. "But who cares if they're joking about violence? Maybe they're joking about joking. This whole thing is so ironic that the levels of irony can't be dismantled."
The humour, Fiset says, gives these young men cover to propagate dangerous ideas.
Zeiger appears to admit as much early in the chat logs. He describes an elaborate prank wherein he contacted newspapers across the United States and lied about an effort by the alt-right to radicalize children using Pokémon cartoon characters.
In a banner he posted online in September 2016, Zeiger depicted Pokémon characters alongside an animated Hitler. Zeiger said it was a ploy to lure the media into writing about the Daily Stormer for free outrageous publicity.
At one point, he claimed he contacted a journalist and posed as an angry mother whose child brought home Nazi Pokémon propaganda.
"The Pokemon banner is part of the campaign to troll the media," he wrote. "There's different reasons (I did this). Make the media look like fools is one. Make the altright look funny and genius-tier master minds is another.
"Create a vast wave of publicity, is third, by using 'child panic.'Then revealing it was all a hoax, for (laughs) ... If this succeeds, every 10-25 year old will instantly think 'the alt-right is where the fun stuff is happening.'" Based on his research, Scrivens says there's little evidence to suggest the young men who are active on these hate forums are the same ones going out to commit violent crimes in the real world.
"People in real organized hate groups are careful about their online activity," he said. "The vast majority of the keyboard warriors are just mouthpieces. But it's a tough call, especially for law enforcement, because you never know what people are capable of."
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER CURTIS;The Gazette

