This past week has been a scorcher. If you're lucky enough to have air conditioning at home, where you work and in your vehicle, consider yourself fortunate. For many Montrealers, especially those who are among the most vulnerable, this has been a stressful time.
We know that our elderly are particularly vulnerable, as are our children, those who are ill and the homeless. We also know that our pets need extra love and attention in the heat, but somehow this knowledge does not seem to be sufficient to prevent tragedies. Just as inevitable as heat waves seem to be tragic, fatal incidents of children and pets being left in vehicles. There was yet another such incident involving a toddler in British Columbia this past May. Yes, we seem to have this conversation year after year.
Something that I have heard all too often from older family members who live without air conditioning is that they sometimes do not feel the heat rise as quickly as they used to. The results can be especially devastating, as they may not be fully aware of how hot it is, especially if they suffer from such additional health conditions as asthma or Alzheimer's, or be recovering from a stroke.
This is why it's essential to take the time to check in on our parents, relatives or neighbours, and perhaps take them out to an air-conditioned mall or movie theatre. Those who do so know how important it is, but all too often we become preoccupied with our jobs, kids and travels. I was pleased to see Mayor Valérie Plante announcing proactive initiatives Wednesday to stay ahead of this heat wave and to ensure that our city's most vulnerable are checked on and taken care of.
Infants and toddlers are also particularly vulnerable to dehydration or heat exhaustion. The symptoms can come on quickly in the intense heat, and the damage can be devastating.
The timing of the current heat wave, coinciding with the recent big July 1 moving day, creates extra challenges, particularly when it comes to pets: this is a time when animals are abandoned in great numbers by owners moving to places where pets are excluded. The number of animals abandoned by their owners annually in Montreal is around 10,000-15,000, which, while staggeringly high, is still significantly lower than the 100,000 pets that used to be left annually 30 years ago.
Hot weather increases the vulnerability of pets, abandoned or not. It's essential to raise awareness among pet owners. I came across a graphic online that startled me. When temperatures reach 25 C, the temperature of asphalt is much hotter, at 51 C. At just 32 C, as we have been experiencing, the temperature of asphalt feels closer to 60 C, and this can lead to scorched paws. I don't need to own a dog to know that such temperatures can lead to avoidable accidents.
There also have been some troubling reports online recently of dogs being tied to trees while their owners shop, and more posts than I can count where people are saying that their neighbours who moved left their cats or dogs behind. We all share in the responsibility of bringing attention to these incidents, whether it means posting them online or contacting the right authorities.
But there has been good news, too. I love reading that some stores across the country have been allowing dogs inside their stores to discourage shoppers from leaving their pets locked up in their vehicles. I also love seeing establishments leave bowls of fresh water outside for dogs being walked.
We'll all have an easier time getting through the summer heat if we remain vigilant and think of others. Fariha Naqvi-Mohamed is the founder and editor in chief of CanadianMomEh.com, a lifestyle blog. Twitter.com/canadianmomeh
CREDIT: FARIHA NAQVI-MOHAMED;The Gazette

