The owners of the city's horsedrawn carriages will learn Friday morning if they will continue their livelihoods in the new year.
A judge is expected to rule on an injunction request from the owners to temporarily suspend the city's bylaw banning the practice, which is due to come into force on Jan. 1.
Lawyers for the owners and the city were in court Thursday arguing their case. The owners say the city is outside its authority to abolish the horse-drawn carriage industry because it is provincial jurisdiction.
"You can't prohibit something that is outside your jurisdiction," said Audi Gozlan, who represents Luc Desparois, owner of Services des calèches et traineau Lucky Luc.
"Especially when the balance of inconvenience tells you that these people are going to lose everything because of this decision."
The city has 15 permits outstanding, which give owners the permission to own and operate horse-drawn carriages, but a bylaw adopted in 2018 would rescind those permits as of Jan. 1.
Gozlan said because the permits were only issued once by the city, they have a high resale value, with some people spending up to $200,000 for the permits.
He added that December and the beginning of January are considered to be high season for the drivers because of the high number of tourists in town, so repealing the permits on Jan. 1 will be punitive for the drivers.
However, the city has said the calèche drivers are misusing the legal system in this case.
They argue that the bylaw was enacted in August 2018, so the drivers have known about it for 16 months and they can't claim there is an urgency just because they failed to act in time.
"They're coming here at one minute to midnight and arguing it's an emergency," lawyer Mélissandre Asselin-Blain argued. "But this is an emergency of their own making."
This is the second time in four years the calèche industry has had to defend its fate in court.
Gozlan represented the drivers in 2016 when then-mayor Denis Coderre wanted to put a moratorium on the practice for a year.
A judge ruled in favour of the drivers and granted a temporary injunction.
Coderre then settled with the drivers, agreeing to let them continue the practice and promising a horse-themed amusement park within the city.
When Valérie Plante was elected in 2017, one of her campaign pledges was to put an end to the industry.
Incidents like horses collapsing in extreme heat have demonstrated that the calèche industry is inhumane, city councillor and deputy mayor Sterling Downey said this week.
"With heat waves in the summer, with climate change, with extreme colds in the winter, with construction on the roads, with the amount of vehicles that are on the road, we have a serious question on the animals'safety," he said.
Desparois refuted the city's claims, saying the horses are well treated.
"We've gotten tickets, but we fought them successfully in court," Desparois said. "There is no evidence that the horses are mistreated. We have a good relationship with our horses."
He said the owners waited until now to file their injunction because they don't have a lot of means to afford lawyers.
"I don't have a big budget, and I just finished with a judgment against the city of Montreal (where a fine imposed by the city was deemed invalid)," he said.
If the injunction is granted, both parties will return to court early next year to argue on the merits of the case. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder Facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

