It’s the end of the line for King and Maximus, Marilyn and Maya, and the rest of the gentle draft horses that live in an aging stable in Montreal’s Griffintown neighbourhood.
On Dec. 31, they will wheel their carriages out for the last time past the construction sites and new condo towers that have popped up, making their way to the cobblestoned streets of Old Montreal. Their hoofbeats hark back to a bygone era, and soon they will be heard no more.
As of Jan. 1, a city ban will be in effect, putting an end to horse-drawn carriage tours. The new rule was prompted by heightened concern over animal welfare and a series of highprofile incidents involving the horses that spawned a wave of outrage and concern from citizens.
Depending on whom you ask, it’s a victory for the rights of the long-suffering horses or a tragic loss of a piece of the city’s heritage.
For Nathalie Matte, who has worked as a driver for 11 years, it’s the latter. The horses “are what makes Old Montreal magic; it’s not the lights,” the 52-year-old said during a recent open house at the stables in Griffintown, as she finished the final harness adjustments on K.O., a chestnut gelding. “It will be the first time you won’t have the sound of horses there.”
Ms. Matte, who became captivated by the horses while working another job in Old Montreal, denies the animals in the industry are mistreated. “He weighs 2,000 pounds; I weigh 90,” the 52-year-old said as she patted K.O., who wore a dapper top hat perched atop his bridle. “If he didn’t want to go out, I couldn’t make him.”
But for opponents of the industry, including the current city administration, the horsedrawn carriages, known as calèches, belong in the city’s past.
“With heat waves in summer, climate change, extreme cold in the winter, construction and the number of vehicles on the road, we have a serious question on the animals’ safety,” Councillor Sterling Downey told reporters recently. He pointed to a number of incidents involving the horses in the past few years, including one video of a collision between a horse and a car, and another that showed a horse down on the ground after slipping on a metal grate. In 2018, a horse fell and died in the middle of a guided tour.
Mr. Downey insists the administration has done everything it can to ease the transition, including giving a full year’s notice. The city has worked with the provincial labour department to help calèche drivers find other work and have offered to pay the owners $1,000 a horse to retire the animals.
“We’re confident in the position we’ve taken and the actions we’ve taken,” he told reporters. “We’ve been more than respectful. We’ve tried to do everything, taking into consideration this has an impact on people’s lives and livelihoods.”
But many calèche drivers and owners, some of whom have invested heavily in their businesses, say they risk losing everything and don’t know how to move on from an industry in which many have worked for decades.
Luc Desparois, who runs the city’s largest calèche operation, said he’s not done fighting. On Dec. 16, he and a group of owners filed a court injunction in a last-ditch attempt to overturn the ban, arguing the drivers have the right to make a living. In court filings, they argued the drivers would suffer serious financial harm owing to loss of income and would have to go into debt to support themselves and their animals.
Quebec Superior Court Justice Michel Pinsonnault rejected the request, ruling that drivers didn’t demonstrate that an emergency injunction is needed, and the request was brought far too late in the game.

