Osheaga enthusiast Juliana Yang was heartened to learn that plastic drinking straws would not be allowed at the 2018 edition of the music festival. "A step in the right direction," the Montrealer called it.
And she was pleased to hear of other green initiatives announced in July by concert promoter Evenko - among them the presence of a tanker truck to supply the festival with free drinking water, to reduce the use of individual bottles and encourage the use of reusable containers. The initiative was undertaken with the National Bank.
But Yang was disappointed to see "disturbing amounts of plastic water bottles and cups" littering the grounds at Parc Jean-Drapeau during last weekend's festival. The 20-year-old University of Edinburgh architecture student photographed the scene on Sunday, the final day of the three-day festival, and sent an image to the Montreal Gazette.
The culprit was the heat, said Philip Vanden Brande, Evenko's manager of public and media relations.
When organizers learned that an extreme heat warning would be in effect last weekend, it was decided that the security team would undertake a mass distribution of bottles of water, he said. "Because it was so hot, we did give away a lot of bottles.
"What's important to remember is that the security and safety of festivalgoers is Evenko's priority. At the end of the day, we will do what we have to to keep people safe."
It was Yang's third year at Osheaga, "and I have never stepped on water bottles every two steps the way I did this year," she said in an interview Tuesday.
It was particularly disappointing to see "such an appalling amount of plastic" in light of the fact organizers had promoted their efforts to be more eco-friendly, she said. "People walking around were commenting, 'There are a lot of water bottles.'" Yang said the five water stations in place were awkwardly located and difficult to access, and that they often had long lineups. With 45,000 concertgoers per day, more water stations were needed - even without a heat wave, she said.
Vanden Brande acknowledged the lineups, but said "a lot had to do with the weather."
As in prior years, food vendors at Osheaga were required to use compostable containers, cups and utensils, and some offered eco-cups for which concertgoers paid a refundable deposit, he said. As well, some eco-friendly bottles were distributed for use at the filling stations, he added.
As in the past, waste sorting centres to encourage recycling and composting were in place, and "it is definitely something we want to increase."
Although festival co-ordinators were "extremely pleased" with eco-conscious efforts to date, "we always want to get better," Vanden Brande said.
"Festivalgoers have a responsibility, too," he said. "There were 45,000 people a day on the grounds. We do a lot with garbage and recycling bins and composting, but I do think it is an effort for everyone to make - concertgoers, concessions, everyone."
"Being eco-responsible means taking concrete action, year after year, to minimize the ecological footprint of our events," Evenko said in a statement in July, when the ban on straws was announced. The ban also applied to other summer festivals, including the ÎleSoniq electronic-music festival taking place at Parc Jean-Drapeau Friday and Saturday.
ShazamFest in the Eastern Townships is far smaller than Osheaga, but the festival is known for its efforts to minimize waste. The 13th edition drew nearly 2,000 people over four days in July and, after sorting, there were only 12 bags of garbage - not even 100 grams of garbage per person. Eight recycling bins were filled, and five compost bins.
"We don't create a lot of garbage," founder Ziv Przytyk said of the festival, which takes place on his organic family farm. "There is hardly any garbage anywhere."
But it was a process, he said. "You have to create a culture. It happens slowly.
"I talk about encouraging less waste. I tell people, 'Thank you for coming; please keep the place clean.'" There is free access to potable water, and people can bring their own bottles, he said. No water is sold at the festival. Actual plates are used, washed and reused - there are about 200, said Przytyk - and there are compostable cups.
Przytyk and his brother started to sort the garbage back in the third or fourth year of the festival. Today, there is a trash-sorting party after the festival ends, to separate the trash from what can be recycled and composted - and there's free beer and food for anyone who helps.
Most of what makes up the trash is non-recyclable food wrapping, Przytyk said. And the item recycled more than any other? Plastic water bottles. sschwartz@postmedia.com
CREDIT: SUSAN SCHWARTZ;The Gazette

