Bonjour/hi, Syrian refugees!
Welcome to our city and our country. You've had a week to adjust to the warm December weather, even if you don't realize how great it's been.
It's not just the climate that's warm. Quebecers have opened their homes, hearts and clothing closets to you. From N.D.G. to Trois-Rivieres, they've been feverishly knitting you hats for the "25,000 tuques campaign," while others attempt hand-knitted sweaters and ice scrapers. The Canada Council is providing you with free kids' books and $200,000 in museum, art and theatre tickets. I hope the Canadiens don't shower you with free season tickets or we might turn some of you into scalpers.
I know Toronto refugee agencies are giving advice on Canadian culture from "what's a double-double?" (two creams, two sugars) to "what's a toonie?" (two loonies). But here are some tips on life in Montreal:
WEATHER
You've gotten a break from our new PM's "sunny ways", which have heated up our environment and added to global warming.
You could easily have arrived in a howling blizzard or ice storm that tempted you to get back on the plane and take your chances with refugee camps, or civil war. You could have spent the last week helping shovel out your sponsoring family's car, or deicing their windshield, or flapping about in giant mittens that will feel like flippers at first.
Winter is our country, but if you're lucky it won't be this year.
POLITICS
You've had some lucky timing there too, as our new government has made you Syrian refugees an inspiring national symbol to replace our last government's symbols: winning more Olympic medals, building more prisons and putting up more pictures of the Queen.
You've come to the right place at the right time. In Trumplandia to our south, presidential candidates and governors are trying to defriend a quarter of the world's population and put up "No Muslims allowed" signs.
They want to give religion tests to new immigrants like you, presumably a two-step border identification process:
Ask if you're Muslim - and deport you if the answer is "yes."
If it's "no," give you a free bacon, lettuce and tomato sandwich - then deport you if you won't eat it, along with some unlucky vegetarians.
But here, Canadians are eager to embrace you with compassion, partly to help - and partly to restore our self-image as a country where love trumps hate.
Our PM greeted you at the airport, along with opposition MPs, creating an international buzz that's made us the poster child for welcoming immigrants. We've gotten rave reviews in European and American media and high praise in a New York Times editorial saying "Canada's generosity and Mr. Trudeau's personal warmth ... can serve as a beacon for others."
So thank you Syrians - you're doing as much for us as we are for you.
SAFETY
Some of you may still be afraid to take out the garbage at night, but unlike your old country you can walk anywhere, anytime. There are no armed militia, snipers or zealots eager to measure a woman's hemline.
There's no army on the streets - we barely have one. There's no curfew, except last call at 3 a.m. and our mayor wants to make that 6. There's no ISIS trying to ice you - or us.
Our only danger at night is Montreal cyclists who dress entirely in black, while wearing earphones and texting. Our only legally sanctioned violence is at hockey games.
CITY LIFE
I've travelled through Syria so I know you're not impressed by our potholes, as yours were competitive - and that was before the bomb craters.
However our new city symbol is the orange cone you'll see lining every street, far outnumbering fleur-de-lis or maple leafs. Our cones are unpredictable, exasperating and chaotic - like our city - but you shouldn't have to worry about them until spring.
Our local landmarks are Mount Royal, the molehill we call a mountain, along with the St. Lawrence, whose bridge traffic jams are our only obstacle to weekend freedom. Our mayor is Coderre, our premier Couillard and eventually you'll learn to tell them apart.
LANGUAGE
Take your French lessons seriously: many anglos didn't and wound up living in other cities - and we want you to stay. But learn English, too. In fact, many English words are also handy when speaking French, like: Eniwe.
Tres cool. Bain fun. Bon weekend. "Un smoked meat, s'il vous plait!" P.K. Subban Overall, you've come to a great town where anglophones, francophones and xylophones have always solved our differences peacefully. We're a land of many immigrants, whether we came 500 years ago or drifted over later and stayed - but there's always room for more.
So welcome, bienvenue, ciao, l'chaim and Joyeux Noel. I'm sorry you just missed Hanukkah. Joshfreed49@gmail.com
Credit: JOSH FREED; The Gazette

