Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante wants an explanation for why the city's roads, sidewalks and bike paths continue to be covered with ice.
"There has to be an analysis of what can be done differently," Plante said. "Is there a lack of employees, a lack of resources? I want to find solutions."
Plante has ordered all boroughs to submit a report about the state of ice-removal operations so she can determine which jurisdictions appear to have the best method for keeping roads and sidewalks slipfree.
"It's clear that some boroughs had no problems, but in others, it's more difficult," the mayor said. "I know it's not perfect because I walk outside and I see what people are posting on social media.
"I want to have a report on everything that happened over the holidays so we can improve for next time."
Plante noted the central city has control of snow-removal operations but ice removal is left to individual boroughs.
As for the city's much-vaunted ice-crushers - made available to boroughs last year to scrape ice off sidewalks - they operate only when ice is at least one inch thick. Eight trucks were ordered at a cost of about $20,000 each, but none has been put to use so far this season.
Plante said she appreciates residents who flag problem areas by calling 311 or posting photos on social media.
She said the city must become better at ice removal, because climate change will likely mean more episodes of freezing rain.
"We seem to be doing well with snow-removal operations, but we'll have more ice episodes, for sure," she said.
If Plante's comments sound familiar, that's because she made roughly the same ones about a year ago when sidewalks were covered with ice.
On Jan. 31 of last year, Plante said she was concerned about uneven service among boroughs following a minor ice storm, saying some had sent teams out to spread abrasives six times, while others just sent them out once.
At that time, she said she would meet with the boroughs about best practices. jmagder@postmedia.com twitter.com/jasonmagder facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

