Blizzards, stranded motorists, ice damage and frozen transport routes. Marco Parent welcomes them all.
"When everyone goes inside, I go outside," he says.
Parent, 24, left the comparatively sheltered life of radio host in Shawinigan four years ago to join MeteoMedia, the French-language arm of national specialty channel The Weather Network. Parent is MeteoMedia's Montreal reporter for weather disasters in Canada and the United States.
"As a source of weather stories, Montreal is the perfect storm," says Parent. "Heat, smog, snow, wind chill, dangerous pavements, burst pipes, damaged roads, we've got it all."
Parent also seeks out positive stories and covers eco-friendly initiatives, such as green housing developments, as well as activities that encourage people to go outside and enjoy the weather instead just complaining about it.
"I'm particularly interested in people whose livelihoods are directly affected by weather," says Parent. "As a keen skier, it was an eye-opener to discover what happens behind the scenes at ski resorts and interview the cooks, chairlift mechanics and other staff."
A bigger eye-opener was probably New Brunswick's weather bomb in March 2014, with its pounding rain, high winds and heavy snow.
"Cameraman Michel Millaire and I got stuck in Shediac (N.B.) during the snowstorm of our lives - just after warning people not to go outside. It looked like we would have to sleep in the news van until a viewer tweeted us with an offer of help. We were escorted to a hotel by rescuers on snowmobiles.
Parent knows he's not supposed to put himself in danger for work, but admits to enjoying the adrenalin rush: "Michel and I sometimes push things to get the best shot.
You need to get close to the story to tell it properly."
But it takes more than willingness to face the elements to be a weather reporter.
When Parent raced to Massachusetts last January to cover the snowstorms, no cameraman was available to join him. Undeterred, Parent filmed the storm damage, recorded his pieces to camera, laid down the voice-overs, edited the footage and sent complete reports in two languages - all with his iPad.
"I'm no supergeek, and it was the first time I'd been out alone," he says. "But the Internet and financial pressures on mainstream media are increasing the demand for new breed of multi-skilled journalists. Anyways, in this case it was a story that had to be told, no matter what."
While looking for a place to stay the night, Parent found a group of people who had been forced from their homes seeking shelter in the lobby of a BB in Scituate - a small coastal town outside Boston.
"They were stressed and anxious.
Some gave me the keys to their houses, saying, 'Go there and show the world how bad it is.' I went out the next morning and it was as if I'd entered the Ice Age. The houses looked like they'd been dipped in the sea and then frozen solid."
Parent was able to enter one house to face an eerie sight: "It was a framed family portrait, encased in a block of ice, showing the people I'd met the night before."
The incident points to what Parent considers are the three main aspects of his work: "To warn people of danger, to show why we have to respect nature and to tell good stories. That's the part I love the most."
With the arrival of spring, Parent would now like to chase some tornadoes in Texas - if MeteoMedia decides to send him there.
"Don't tell my boss, but I'd pay to do it," he says. "It's my Mount Everest."
Credit: RICHARD ANDREWS; The Gazette
Illustration MARCO PARENT / MeteoMedia's Marco Parent in Scituate, Mass., after a late-January storm there.

