Montreal Gazette columnist Don Macpherson compared Quebecor to Fox News in a recent column. I could not disagree more. It's hard for me to stay silent, especially for my colleagues. In my years with Le Journal de Montréal, which is owned by Quebecor, never did I feel I was working for a shrill, populist, conspiracy-loving media outlet à la Fox.
Now, full disclosure. I worked with Mr. Péladeau père when I ran enRoute, then published by Quebecor. I was a friend of his eldest daughter Isabelle, who died in a car accident in 2013, and I gave a eulogy at her funeral. I am also close to estranged sister Anne-Marie and to her daughter Marie-Pierre.
As for Pierre Karl Péladeau, he is the prototype of an inspired and engaged media owner, but the editorial freedom I enjoy as a columnist at Le Journal remains unsurpassed compared with other large media conglomerates I worked for in the past.
When PKP became leader of the Parti Québécois, I wrote about the conflicts of interest he faced as owner of the largest media company in Quebec.
One morning, I bumped into him in the Maison de Radio-Canada.
"You don't spare me, do you?" he said. "Why should I?" I replied. He laughed.
More importantly, Quebecor does not employ ideologues as nauseating as Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson or Lou Dobbs of Fox News. Nor are TVA, LCN or Le Journal right-wing propaganda machines.
Anyone who accuses Quebecor's columnist Richard Martineau of "Islamophobia" has never read his work properly. He goes after political Islam, or Islamism. Not ordinary Muslims.
Briefly explained, Islamism works toward the implementation of sharia law. (Islamists tried but failed, thanks to the efforts of Quebec's Morocco-born Fatima Houda-Pepin, then a Liberal MNA, to establish Canadian sharia family courts.) Some Islamists are violent, others denounce violence; sadly many instrumentalize democracy and our human rights laws to suit the needs of their politico-religious agenda.
Those most at risk from Islamists in Canada are non-religious Muslims, especially women. But journalists who cover this beat often remain silent while young girls are kidnapped by their families to be married abroad, become someone's fourth wife thanks to imams who think our laws are naff, or undergo female genital mutilation because they don't want to be seen as Islamophobic.
Not me. I will write. I will growl. I will denounce. I may bite.
I examined Le Journal's cover stories online on a recent Sunday. Nothing there qualified as populist: "No more grades inflation in schools," "Sexual predator on the loose in Tétreaultville," "Flooded without living in a flood zone," "Hydro-Québec's management of its dams criticized," "Motorcyclist killed," "Vice-admiral Norman: The Opposition requests an emergency meeting."
Far from trying to mobilize people against an elite, à la Fox, Le Journal gives ordinary Quebecers the kind of news they are interested in, which explains why Quebecor's dailies (Le Journal de Montréal, de Québec, 24H) are read by 55 per cent of all Quebecers aged 14 and over, while other media struggle. La Presse had to turn to not-for-profit fundraising when Power Corporation jettisoned the newspaper it had purchased 51 years ago.
Meanwhile, Quebecor successfully launched an online radio station, QUB - I have daily columns - which has already won national awards for podcasts.
Le Journal enjoys an incredible connection to its readers. Call it populism if you insist, but I prefer to call it popular.
This year, Le Journal de Montréal took home the Prix Hubert Reeves for its science compendium Tout savoir en cinq minutes at the Grands Prix du journalisme, catégorie Grand Public. Le Journal also had finalists in most categories.
That recognition, and much more over the years, serves as a rebuttal to detractors who dismiss Quebecor, one of the few media companies that continue to hire and invest heavily in content.
I am proud to be part of the most ideologically diverse, challenging and successful bunch of Quebecor columnists. lravary@yahoo.com
CREDIT: LISE RAVA RY;The Gazette

