AT A GLANCE
The garden at Glen Villa will be open to the public on Saturday from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Tickets for morning visits (9 a.m. to 12:30 p.m.) or afternoon visits (12:30 p.m. to 4 p.m.) are $25 and the money will go to the Massawippi Foundation. Tickets can be purchased the day of the event at the garden, but because space is limited organizers suggest buying them in advance online at massawippi.org.
Two brochures with maps, one to guide visitors through the garden and another to guide them along the Timelines trail, will be available in English and French. Volunteers to answer questions in English and French and provide guidance will also be on site. Dogs are not permitted and neither is picnicking.
Glen Villa is at 1020 Chemin de North Hatley, Ste-Catherine-de-Hatley - less than one kilometre from Hovey Manor in North Hatley. More on the Massawippi Foundation can be found at massawippi.org.
Pat Webster has been working for two decades on the garden at Glen Villa, the Eastern Townships home she shares with her husband Norman, and she has created an extraordinary and rambling space that marries nature, history and art.
On Saturday, the couple will open their garden to the public as a fundraiser for the Massawippi Foundation. Tickets are $25 for morning or afternoon visits.
Glen Villa, a 750-acre property on the shores of Lake Massawippi in Ste-Catherine-de-Hatley, about 130 kilometres from Montreal, has been many things during the past 150 years: the site of two summer hotel resorts, a large dairy farm and summer cottages. Its original inhabitants, long before that, were the Abenakis.
Saturday marks the third time since 2016 that the Websters have opened their garden to benefit the Massawippi Foundation.
Since its establishment in 2011, the foundation has raised more than $4 million. The money has supported community projects in the five municipalities around Lake Massawippi, conserved in perpetuity 1,200 acres of pristine forest and built several kilometres of trails open to the public.
But this is the first time visitors will be able to walk Timelines, a 2.9-km trail through fields and forests on the property featuring art installations "that explore ideas about memory, identity and our relationship with the land," as Pat Webster puts it.
She described Timelines in a post this month on her Site & Insight blog and concluded: "The land speaks its own version, not through words but through sound and scent, taste, touch and sight. Walking the trail is a total experience and pictures convey only a tiny part of it."
Among the trail's features:
Bridge Ascending: a sculpture by Quebec artists Satoshi Saito and Louise Doucet built from the ruins of a covered bridge that once crossed the Massawippi River. It was destroyed by fire in 2002.
Part of an art installation, Abenaki Walking, created by Pat Webster to honour the history of the Abenakis.
Perspective: a sign behind a child-sized Adirondack chair points toward an oversized chair in the distance. The word Perspective is depicted in shrinking letters.
Orin's Sugarcamp: tin maple leaves hang from branches of spruce, pine and hemlock trees around a re-creation of a sugar camp named to remember Orin Gardner, a farmer who once made maple syrup on the land.
The Grandchildren Trees: eleven maple trees are named and dated to mark the birth of each of the Webster grandchildren.
Glen Villa's history is also reflected in a series of themed garden "rooms." There's the China Terrace, an imagined re-creation by Pat Webster of Glen Villa Inn, a large resort hotel that stood on the site from 1902 until it was destroyed by fire in 1909. The "carpet" under the "dining table" is made of tiles featuring shards of hotel china she found on the property.
The Upper Room, a formal garden set in the middle of the woods, is a memorial designed by Pat Webster to honour her mother and her beliefs. As she wrote in 2017 about the space: "It's a tribute to family and to the traditions I grew up with in Richmond, Virginia, when classically symmetrical architecture, brick and boxwood shaped our streetscapes and our view of the world."
A series of sandblasted glass panels depict branches and leaves of a dogwood tree, as drawn by Montreal artist Mary Martha Guy. A pair of white oak benches designed by Webster sit at right angles to the panels and bring to mind church pews.
The Asian Meadow recalls the years the Websters spent in China: Norman Webster, who had a distinguished career as a journalist and worked as a foreign correspondent, reporter and editor-in-chief for the Gazette and Globe and Mail, was posted to the Globe's China bureau from 1969 to 1971.
The Lower Garden features perennial borders and a rock garden on the site of a former summer cottage. A nearby zinc spire from a 19th-century English church is a reminder of the time the Websters lived in England, where Norman was the Globe's London correspondent. sschwartz@postmedia.com
CREDIT: SUSAN SCHWARTZ;The Gazette

