At least it snowed in the hills.
Skiers will be happy to know that the Laurentians received 30 centimetres on Wednesday morning as heavy snowfall and blizzard conditions spared Montreal.
With up to 20 centimetres forecast for the city on Wednesday morning, there were fewer than 10 that actually fell by rush hour.
The blizzard warning for Montreal was lifted in the early hours of Wednesday. The revised forecast called for accumulation of just 10 centimetres for Montreal for the day, down significantly from the more than 20 centimetres predicted on Tuesday. That's not considered to be a major winter storm according to how Environment Canada categorizes weather events.
"For Montreal, the trajectory of the low-pressure system was a tad further north than expected," said Marie-Eve Giguere, a meteorologist with Environment Canada. "So that brought ice pellets mixed with snow. It really decreased the snowfall amounts and made for better visibility than expected."
Driving on highways was actually better than normal for a Wednesday morning rush hour, as there were fewer cars on the road, both because of severe weather warnings, and because it is spring break week for many schools.
But while driving conditions were much better than expected on roads and highways in Montreal, that was not the case further east and north. "It's particularly bad in the Laurentians and the Quebec City region," said Surete du Quebec Sgt. Helene Nepton. "We're seeing snow drifts that are pretty significant. The snow plows come, and a few minutes later, it's like they were never there."
She said a few cars spun out, but there were no serious accidents or injuries Wednesday morning.
The Mauricie region, which includes Trois-Rivieres, the Laurentians and the Quebec City region all still had blizzard conditions on Wednesday morning, Giguere said. She explained that a blizzard is not related to the amount of snowfall. Rather, it warns of reduced visibility because of snow and wind for more than four hours and a wind chill colder than minus-20C.
Wednesday's conditions caused some travel delays, especially at Trudeau Airport where several early morning flights to Toronto were cancelled Wednesday.
The skies are expected to clear for Thursday, with sunny days ahead from Thursday until Sunday, but it will be colder than normal for this time of year. Giguere said highs near -10 are forecast for Thursday and Friday. It will warm up to minus-6 on Saturday, and get close to the freezing point on Sunday, and temperatures well above zero are expected next week. The city of Montreal announced it will begin snow removal operations, with all boroughs expecting to begin clearing snow by 7 a.m. Thursday. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/JasonMagder Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist
Credit: JASON MAGDER; The Gazette
Illustration SUSAN FERGUSON /

