As the Société de transport de Montréal is celebrating a milestone for adapted transit service, a company that provides that service says the agency is shortchanging its drivers.
The STM boasted a record four million adapted transit trips in 2017 and had planned a news conference Tuesday to celebrate the achievement. However, the event was cancelled because snow and freezing rain wreaked havoc with the adapted transit service that would have transported some of the event's special guests.
Yung Cuong, the president of the company Taxi Para-Adapté, said the STM is shortchanging the 1,500 taxi drivers who provide 87 per cent of the STM's adapted transit trips.
"If we calculate it properly, we figure we're underpaid by about $12 million per year on the island of Montreal," said Cuong, whose company provides 160 cars and adapted minivans for the STM. "Our drivers are very discouraged."
Cuong said the taxi industry is struggling, and it is difficult for him to find drivers. Making matters worse, providing adapted transit service is a difficult job, and drivers have to provide additional services for which they are not paid.
Cuong explained it costs his drivers about 10 to 12 minutes for each trip to help their passengers load and unload. Because taxi drivers are only paid based on the amount charged on their meters, any time spent outside their cars is time for which they are not paid. He said the time lost on each trip amounts to $12 million in lost revenue over the year.
"It's a lot of time lost, and we're not paid for the physical labour that all this costs," he said. "And on a day like (Tuesday with freezing rain and snow on the streets), it's even longer. A lot of my drivers don't want to work today."
Cuong said when his drivers provide non-medical transportation for hospital transfers, the provincial government pays a base fee of $25 for each trip, which covers the special needs his drivers must provide.
He is asking the STM for a minimum amount for adapted transit trips, ranging from $6 to $8.
STM spokesperson Isabelle Tremblay said it is up to each of the individual taxi companies, not the STM, to figure out how to adequately pay their drivers.
She said the STM has contracts with 13 different taxi companies, and is now in the process of negotiating a new contract with them to take effect later this year.
Tremblay would not say whether the STM will consider adding a base amount for each driver in the upcoming contract, saying the STM will not negotiate in the public sphere. The contract for outsourcing adapted transit service will probably cost between $45 million and $50 million, Tremblay said. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/JasonMagder Facebook.com/JasonMagderJournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

