Aerial insectivores - birds that capture insects while in flight - have taken the hardest hit, mirroring the losses suffered by birds of prey in the 1950s.
The agile barn swallows and swifts that once flitted and swooped through Montreal's skies are a rarity now in eastern North America, for reasons not entirely understood. Part of the cause may be a marked decline in insect populations, with some studies estimating the overall global biomass of insects has dropped 40 per cent due to pesticide use. THE CAUSES The No. 1 reason for falling bird populations is habitat loss. The trend toward monoculture food crops that drain marshes and uproot forests removes crucial feeding and nesting sites.
Urban development means fewer grasslands, forests, shorelines and wetlands in which to live, or stop over for a life-sustaining rest and food before continuing on a migratory journey. Montreal's Nuns'Island was once one of the best owl sites in the province, with half a dozen varieties visible there. Condo development that left no forest uprooted put an end to that.
Until recently in Montreal's Technoparc, birders would see 15 or 16 egrets and herons at the same time. In 2017, Technoparc Montréal, the city-funded non-profit agency responsible for attracting developers, put in a dike and a road that shrunk the marshes. Now, just one or two herons or egrets are typically spotted in the same area. The agency was disbanded by the city last year over concerns of mismanagement.
A station of the coming REM train line is being installed next door, causing further disturbance, although developers did agree to tunnel under the wetlands to preserve them.
In Montreal and throughout Canada, the rebirth of raptors like peregrine falcons and Cooper's hawks has come at the expense of the American Kestrel, which is North America's smallest falcon and prey to the larger birds.
Agriculture producers have been winning the pesticide war on insects, leaving less food for birds, or poisoning them. A recent study published by the journal Science showed migratory birds like the white-crowned sparrow became anorexic after eating seeds laced with neonicotinoids, an agricultural pesticide commonly linked to the death of bees. Since many of Canada's birds migrate south, issues in stopover spots or nesting areas in the United States, Mexico and South America resonate here.
"Look at the Amazon," Bird said, referring to the widespread fires decimating forests and agricultural fields in South America. "If we destroy the habitat down there, it's the same effect as destroying it up here."
Climate change has also been wreaking havoc. Shifts in temperatures mean birds may arrive only to find the insects they normally feed on have not yet appeared. Increased wildfires, drought and sea levels contribute to a loss of habitat. A rise in the number and severity of storms means more migrating birds are killed en route, and shorebirds are seeing their colonies wiped out. Single-use plastics and chemical and oil spills are another hazard. REASONS FOR HOPE Coutu gazes at the great egrets and the imposing great blue herons, the Cooper's hawks and merlins flying over the marshlands in the centre of Montreal and sees a resurgence.
"These birds are all top predators - they're at the top of the food chain. If they can survive here, things are in good shape."
The Technoparc region is home to six birds of prey, including the red-tailed and red-shouldered hawks and the Northern Harrier.
In the fall, six species of owls nest in the region, the only place in Quebec where you can spot so many species of the reclusive bird in one day. Waterfowl are abundant, signs that wide-scale conservation efforts like the North American Waterfowl Management Plan started in 1986, which has protected 80,000 square kilometres of Canadian wetlands and surrounding lands, can work.
Sightings in the Technoparc area of the at-risk least bittern, one of the world's smallest species of herons, and the endangered wood thrush could also improve chances the area will be protected.
"I'm not against development," Coutu said. "I understand there is an economic need. But I feel it can be done in a more ecological way, by building new industries near other existing industries, and not in the middle of a wetland."
Recent news about the ecological park being created nearby, and that Montreal is working to build the largest urban park in Canada, called the Great Western Park, protecting 3,000 hectares of green space, means more habitat.
Here at home, citizens can help by restricting the movements of house cats, which kill millions of birds every year, and bird-proofing their windows to limit deadly collisions.
Hudson put Feather Friendly Tape on her windows, a product made in Toronto that has small white dots spaced a couple inches apart, to deter birds. She also suggests window companies apply an ultraviolet film invisible to humans but visible to birds to their windows, and creating FLAP programs (Fatal Light Awareness Programs) that exist in cities like Toronto to rescue birds that have collided with the windows of buildings. Even the new Champlain Bridge is using blue and green lights as opposed to white during migratory periods to lessen bird collisions.
Above all, Hudson recommends citizens act as lobbyists, writing directly to companies that benefit from bird-threatening measures, like using habitat-destroying palm oil in their products, to say they will no longer buy their products unless they change.
"If enough of us do that, I'm hoping that they'll think with their dollars and say 'OK, if we change this small part of our manufacturing process, then we can regain these customers.'" Bird recommends buying "bird-friendly" coffee, made by growers who leave natural spaces for birds to nest in their plantations.
Promoting green growth in backyards and putting up bird feeders are things people can do immediately, and see the impact, even right outside their windows.
"I just can't imagine being in a world where the only birds I'm going to see in my backyard are starlings and gulls and house sparrows," Bird said.
"All the bird populations are an important part of our culture and an important part of our environment.
And if things aren't good for them, they're not going to be good for us." rbruemmer@postmedia.com
CREDIT: The Gazette

