He was one of this newspaper's youngest and most influential publishers.
Robert McConnell, who pulled the Montreal Gazette from the brink of bankruptcy in the late 1970s, died on Sept. 12 surrounded by family in Victoria, where he lived. He was 76.
"The Montreal Gazette simply wouldn't exist today without him," said longtime friend and former Gazette reporter Henry Aubin.
Born in 1942, McConnell grew up in the Vancouver area, where he got his first job as a reporter for the Vancouver Province and quickly rose through the ranks to become editor.
Former Gazette reporter and columnist John Kalbfleisch grew up in the same neighbourhood and knew him as a teenager, as both were presidents of the student councils at rival high schools.
"My earliest memory of him involves - appropriately enough - a newspaper," Kalbfleisch recalled. "Students at his school had been involved in a beach party that had gotten out of hand, and a local paper interviewed him to ask why the good people of the city should have to endure being offended by 'orgies'like this taking place. The beach party had been anything but an orgy, but in any event Bob replied, 'Orgy? What orgy? The sand was too wet for that.'The forces of outrage were neatly defeated by laughter."
A clipping of that newspaper article - which had McConnell's photo and appeared on the front page of the Vancouver Sun on May 19, 1960 - was displayed at McConnell's funeral in Mayne Island, B.C. on Tuesday.
Kalbfleisch and McConnell became close friends when they both attended the University of British Columbia. Kalbfleisch moved to Montreal to work at The Gazette, and McConnell arrived in the late 1970s, hired to be the paper's general manager and heir apparent to then-publisher Ross Munro.
It wasn't a happy time when Mc-Connell arrived, as The Gazette was losing $2 million a year and was facing declining advertising revenue. On the other side of the spectrum, the rival Montreal Star was seeing record profits of $5.7 million and was expected to weather a storm when its press workers went on strike in 1978. However, much of that paper's survival depended on the Montreal Gazette remaining as the second-tier paper that it was.
McConnell respected an agreement between both papers not to take advantage of a labour conflict, but when it became clear the strike would drag on, and his newspaper's survival was threatened, he acted. He first ensured delivery to existing readers was working well before expanding readership and advertising, growing the newspaper by hundreds of pages in a matter of weeks.
The result was that when The Star returned to publication in February 1979, readers and advertisers had already switched to The Gazette. The Star folded in September of that year, and the expanded Gazette, with McConnell as publisher, purchased its assets and moved into its headquarters at 250 St-Antoine St. W.
"He declared a fearless, all-out campaign to demonstrate that we were the paper that Montrealers who wanted to stay here wanted to read," said former senator Joan Fraser, who worked as the head of the newspaper's editorial board under McConnell. "It would have been easy for Bob to do what The Gazette had done during an earlier strike at the Star - declare a sort of no-poaching standstill - but he had the guts and the vision to do otherwise."
"It was a tremendous coup by McConnell," Aubin agreed. "He played to win. I once asked him his motivations for doing what he did and he told me, 'I did it for the employees, I didn't want to see them out of work.'And I believe him."
Aside from saving the newspaper, Fraser, Aubin and Kalbfleisch all agreed McConnell's sharp wit and respectful tone distinguished him, as he seemed to know all the names of his employees from the editors to the junior reporters and was friendly with all of them.
McConnell moved to Toronto in the 1980s and worked at other jobs at the head office of Southam Inc. - the Gazette's parent company at the time. He also worked as a consultant for the government of British Columbia.
In retirement, McConnell spent many of his days fishing for salmon or searching for wild mushrooms in the woods of Vancouver Island. Kalbfleisch, who remained close with McConnell, said nothing gave him more joy than finding food and cooking a meal for family and friends.
"He was very sociable in that way, and boy, sitting down at the table with him was always a wonderful experience. Not only was the food delicious, but the conversation was (fascinating)," Kalbfleisch said.
McConnell is survived by his wife, Isa Milman, his children, Megan Edge, Morgan McConnell, Anna, Daniel and Malachy Phelan and his grandchildren, Emily and Charlotte Harrison-Edge and Fintan Phelan. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder Facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette



