The end of the school year is usually a time of celebration, appreciation and anticipation.
It's a moment for students to pat themselves on the back for a job well done, thank their teachers and look ahead to summer fun.
But this year, as we know, is different. A lot different.
Thanks to COVID-19, the school year was interrupted, and the usual rites of passage, like year-end concerts, proms and graduation ceremonies, were cancelled or severely curtailed. While it was amazing to see how many schools creatively adapted to salvage these precious milestones, like hosting outdoor convocations and conducting online musical performances, the end of the 2020 school year is like no other.
And now it's time to move on to a summer like no other.
Although Quebec is finally deconfining after three long months - with the number of new COVID-19 cases declining and many activities resuming - life has not returned to normal. Many of our favourite summer pastimes are impossible this year, like sleepaway camp or international travel.
Many people will be staycationing, enjoying summer in their own backyards or on balconville. But even those escaping Montreal will likely be sticking close to home - either going to their chalets, if they're lucky enough to own one, renting a cottage, if they were lucky enough to snag one, camping or maybe touring in an RV.
For those staying put, day camps are allowed, but many decided not to operate because the government's initial social-distancing requirements and staff ratios made no sense. By the time Quebec eased the restrictions, it was too late for many to get up and running.
The list of organizations that have decided not to run day camps ranges from the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts to many municipalities in the West Island. (All three of the ones my daughter was signed up for cancelled.)
Many groups are launching online sessions, to allow kids to pursue extracurricular interests like music and drama. This will help parents fill the void while working from home and trying to keep the kids occupied. But after months of virtual socializing and distance learning, kids could desperately use a break from screens.
So bring on the boredom. Many experts believe we should let kids get bored, that we shouldn't rush to fill their days with scheduled activities, that we should let them explore, invent, imagine and dream. There's something to be said for this philosophy in normal times. But kids have been without structure for months. Allowing them to be bored now would just prolong the agony, rather than offer respite from the usual frenzied pace of life.
Also, revelling in idleness works better when you have a backyard. Many urban children, including the most vulnerable, don't have private space to play outside. The city of Montreal has gone to great lengths to create pedestrian corridors and cycling routes, family streets and superblocks, to give people the elbow room they need to spend time outdoors safely.
Also, libraries are resuming services. Playgrounds are usable again, and to the great relief of all, splash pads and pools opened just in time for the heat wave.
The only problem is, these amenities are in such hot demand, kids have to practise patience. Social-distancing measures still apply, meaning long lineups to swim or run through the waterworks.
Sports are ramping up again, including soccer and baseball. But there won't be any actual games, just practice sessions. At least it will mean some physical activity.
As for entertainment, there won't be any festivals, concerts or fireworks displays - nothing that draws a crowd. After all, we're still on high alert for a resurgence or a second wave of the pandemic.
In a winter city that savours its summers, Montrealers will just have to make the best of what promises to be a long, hot summer. But much of the usual excitement has been tempered by uncertainty. ahanes@postmedia.com

