Fifty-three deaths in Montreal were potentially caused by the record-breaking heat wave that took over the city in early July, says a new report by the public-health department released Wednesday. But that number could continue to rise.
The total presented in the department's preliminary report does not include deaths that occurred in hospitals, only those that occurred within the community from June 30 to July 8, said Dr. David Kaiser, a physician with Santé Montréal. They still have to go through hospital records to determine which deaths may have been heat-related.
He expects that most cases will be of people who were brought to hospitals after being exposed to the heat and died shortly after. More than 5,400 people were taken to hospitals by ambulance throughout the heat wave, says the public health department's report. At the time, Urgences-Santé reported that the number of calls they received was up 30 per cent.
Kaiser said he doesn't expect the death toll to increase substantially. After the 2010 heat wave, which saw temperatures of more than 35 C for five days, he said only 15 per cent of the 106 deaths occurred in hospitals.
Overall, Kaiser said, Montreal saw 10 to 15 more deaths per day during the recent heat wave. As of July 9, another 34 deaths were reported elsewhere in Quebec. The province's Ministry of Health and Social Services said a final province-wide death toll will be released in the fall.
The report says three-quarters of people who died lived alone and that a significant portion of the deaths were related to drug and alcohol consumption. It also says that vulnerable populations were hit the hardest, and recommends that the public-health department collaborate with community groups to protect these individuals as heat waves become more common.
Kaiser said the department looks for three elements to determine whether a death was heat-related. First, he said, they look for underlying medical conditions, both physical and mental, or whether the person had a history of drug or alcohol abuse.
The next indicator would be the environment the person was found in, which Kaiser said was most often apartments without air conditioning located in hotter areas of the city. kelitwin@postmedia.com
CREDIT: KELSEY LITWIN;The Gazette

