Not last year, or the year before. Not even the fabled Ice Storm of '98. Nope. Now is the winter of our discontent.
With apologies to Shakespeare, but Richard III's Gloucester never had to deal with the hellish winter stew this city's residents have had to cope with. Maybe Gloucester had to contend with mist and a bad batch of mead. But no Brexit, either. Just the usual royal backstabbings and parlour games gone awry.
Montrealers, however, wake up every morning in some twisted version of Groundhog Day, wherein spring will never come.
It invariably starts with a "special weather statement" issued by Environment Canada: Batten down the hatches, because there will be wind gusts of nearly 100 kilometres an hour. This will be followed by ice pellets turning to freezing rain to rain, and, yes, a dump of snow, ranging from 10 to 40 centimetres. (And isn't there some sort of meteorological mercy rule where it is forbidden to snow when the thermometer hits nuclear winter climes?) In this gift from the weather gods, the temperature will rise from a few degrees above zero to far too many degrees below, meaning that all the preceding rain will turn our streets and sidewalks into skating rinks, which would even defy the dexterity of a seasoned Cirque du Soleil acrobat.
Staying vertical these days has become a losing proposition, as a marked increase in hospital emergency-room visits for busted arms, legs and hips would certainly seem to indicate.
Yes, this ongoing "fraw" - flash freezing turning to thaws - or "theeze" - the opposite of the aforementioned - can be linked to climate change. (Even the skeptical Donald Trump must have found it odd to be conducting an outdoor news conference in the White House Rose Garden - in early February.)
That said, it's safe to assume weather conditions are the same in all our boroughs and municipalities. So why, pray tell, are sidewalks and streets far more navigable in Montreal West or Westmount than they are in the city centre? Not surprisingly, the anger level in this city is palpable. Cyclists, motorists and pedestrians are all fuming/foaming.
We've had far worse weather over the years. But even in the darkest days of the Ice Storm, there was a sort of solidarity, with citizens coming to the aid of one another.
Now there's plenty of finger-pointing. My friend and fellow griper Aaron Rand recently mused that the city would invest in heated bike paths before heated sidewalks.
He was sort of joking.
Regardless, cyclists were up in arms, lamenting that conditions were far from pristine on paths through the Lachine Canal and Jacques Cartier Bridge.
Which, in turn, incurred the wrath of pedestrians, wondering why in the world the city doesn't invest in heated sidewalks - which would make so much sense for health and economic reasons - and why did it invest in seemingly useless sidewalk ice-crushers.
It's no win for pedestrians. Those who can't stay vertical on icy sidewalks have taken to the street, and have occasionally paid the price after being ticketed by overzealous cops for so doing.
When the city is in its thaw mode, there tends to be an accumulation of slush, much of which gets sprayed on to the bodies of pedestrians by seemingly oblivious motorists speeding through our streets - when they can.
And, of course, city motorists are never happy. When not having to deal with constant gridlock and road construction, they've been engaged in the not-so-popular city sport of Dodge the Pothole.
This game will become even more daunting when spring comes - if it ever comes - and potholes will morph into sinkholes, which is one way to keep citizens from fleeing the city for the 'burbs.
And why does the city always resort to Band-Aid solutions with half-assed pothole repairs instead of tackling the problem seriously and permanently with cement, as suggested by Robert Libman in a recent Gazette op-ed piece? All by way of saying that the under-the-plough Plante administration is no doubt delighted there won't be a municipal election for another couple of years. The mayor is fully aware of discontent in the winter air.
The only people in town who are likely content now are those in the business of patching flat tires - those that can be saved, that is - or selling everything from hubcaps to new tires to wheel alignments to suspension systems, for those whose vehicles haven't dodged the potholes.
"Business is certainly good, but we're drivers, too, dealing with the same issues," says Merson Automotive's Celso Louro.
"The potholes are particularly crazy this year, but add to that terrible weather and high taxes and we're seeing many miserable people these days." bbrownstein@postmedia.com twitter.com/billbrownstein
CREDIT: BILL BROWNSTEIN;The Gazette

