Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante hopes the recent chilling scientific report on climate change will help to persuade premier-designate François Legault that fighting global warming should be a top priority for his new provincial government.
On Sunday, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released a special report warning that rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in how cities are managed, as well as land, energy, industry, buildings, and transportation, are urgently needed to keep global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius.
The IPCC is the United Nations body for assessing the science related to climate change and providing policy-makers with information on risks, mitigation and adaptation strategies.
Plante told reporters Tuesday that the special report only increased her determination to pursue her administration's plan to make Montreal carbon neutral by 2050.
That plan, announced at a climate conference in San Francisco last month and not yet fully unveiled, involves compensating for all carbon emissions and rendering all municipal buildings energy efficient.
"When I read that report I didn't learn anything new," Plante said. "But I said to myself here is another opportunity for all of us to speak up with one voice. We have a new (provincial) government and I think it will listen to what is being said. We have to think globally and transportation is the principal battle call in Quebec. We can't switch from fossil fuels to clean energy, because we already have. So transportation is our focal point and that means major investments," in projects such as new métro lines and tramways, she said.
Legault has promised to widen and extend some highways, which critics say will only increase carbon emissions by worsening urban sprawl and traffic congestion. But he has also said he wants Quebec to participate in an international carbon trading market. It is not clear whether Legault will commit to meeting Quebec's previous objectives for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
The IPCC special report looked at the difference in impact of allowing the planet to warm by 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels as opposed to two degrees.
The latter would have far more devastating impacts on humans and other species, including exposing 420 million more people across the planet to severe heat waves, according to the report.
United Nations secretary general António Guterres called the report an "ear-splitting wake-up call to the world" and noted that a half a degree of warming more would cause more deadly heat waves, greater species loss, water scarcity and wipe out the world's coral reefs.
The world is already feeling the consequences of one degree C of global warming, a level that has caused more extreme weather, rising sea levels and diminishing Arctic sea ice, the report noted.
"The decisions we make today are critical in ensuring a safe and sustainable world for everyone, both now and in the future," said Debra Roberts, the co-chair of one of the working groups that produced the report." The next few years are probably the most important in our history."
Plante echoed that urgency Tuesday, saying the government of Quebec "must absolutely say loud and clear that (it favours) public transit options like reserved bus lanes, electric buses, tramways ... in short, we must think big, be ambitious because that is the point we are at."
She said her administration plans to produce a guide for how individual Montrealers can make changes in their day-to-day lives to counter climate change, but she said the real battle will be fought in the political arena.
"We don't want to put it on individuals to save the planet. They can help. But it is really about how we can make collective choices," she said. "I would ask Montrealers to support us when we decide to buy or enlarge green spaces, help me to fight for more public transport options. As a metropolis, we have to stand strong and say this is what needs to be done. We want massive investment, we want a clear decision and we want political will behind this. It is so important. It's crucial. It's now. We need to act now." mlalonde@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MICHELLE LALONDE;The Gazette

