So what kind of heartburn do you think the Max 67 burger would cause in Boston today?
In the 34 times they've met in post-season series, the Canadiens and Bruins have had some glorious, even historic, battles, Montreal pounding out 25 victories.
Alas, there will not be a 35th this spring, not with the Bruins having gone into a shockingly early hibernation by failing to be among the 16 NHL teams to advance to the playoffs.
So let's focus instead on the Ottawa Senators, whom the Canadiens have met only once in the modern-era post-season, losing an eventful five-game Eastern Conference quarter-final two seasons ago.
That 2013 series began with nauseating niceness between two clubs that are neighbours geographically but which had, at the time, no history at all.
Fast-forward two years, to the 2015 Eastern Conference quarter-final that begins at the Bell Centre on Wednesday, and a nastiness that likely lies in wait.
It was May 1 almost two years ago, on the eve of the opener, that Ottawa's then-captain Daniel Alfredsson stood outside his team's Bell Centre dressing room and reverse trash-talked his opponent.
The 40-year-old spoke glowingly and graciously of Canadiens fans, the energy of the Bell Centre, even about the grand history of the stately old Forum.
Before it ever began, Alfie practically killed the series with kindness.
Indeed, the silky Swede's first career point on Montreal ice had come at the Forum a month before the venerable barn had closed; he assisted on the Feb. 10, 1996, game-winning goal scored by Senators captain Randy Cunneyworth - you remember him - on a team coached by Jacques Martin - you remember him, too.
"Before we had the team (born for the 1992-93 season), people were either Toronto or Montreal fans," Aldredsson said of hockey faithful in the national capital region. "We had a lot of Montreal fans in Ottawa and we're converting them one step at a time. We think this series will go a long way toward helping that, as well."
Oh my, how it did that. A best-of-seven that began steeped in mutual admiration dissolved into bitterness and violence on the ice, fingerpointing, sniping by two coaches, shabby officiating and injuries that overflowed the clinic.
It got offto a horrifying start in Game 1, Canadiens centre Lars Eller leaving the ice on a stretcher after having been knocked out, concussed with facial and dental fractures, when flattened by the high, hard open-ice check of the Senators' Eric Gryba.
The Ottawa defenceman would be suspended for two games, which did little to still the waves.
Then-Senators coach Paul MacLean called Gryba's check "a hockey play," and ruffled Montreal feathers by blaming it on a suicide pass to Eller by Canadiens defenceman Raphael Diaz. Or, as MacLean called Diaz, "No. 61, whoever that is."
Canadiens coach Michel Therrien was incensed by MacLean's apparent lack of sensitivity for the injured Eller, who would miss the rest of the series.
"Inappropriate comment," Therrien said through gritted teeth before Game 2. "No respect for the player who was on the ice bleeding. ... That was a lack of respect to Lars Eller. A lack of respect to his family. And I'm never going to accept that. Never."
MacLean shrugged offthe heat he was getting for referring to Diaz only by his jersey number.
"If that was being harsh, being cruel to the player 61, it's a big world out there. Grow up," he said.
But it was Canadiens forward Brandon Prust who poured a refinery on this fire, asked to comment on the view of the bushy-moustached MacLean that the Gryba hit was legal.
"(MacLean) already showed enough disrespect," Prust said, "so we don't really care about what that bug-eyed fat walrus has to say."
Jackpot. "Bug-eyed. I've never been called that before," MacLean would reply. "That's a new one. Walrus? That's too easy.
"But I'll tell you one thing - I'm not fat. I might be husky, but I'm not fat. I took offence to that."
Did this series suddenly have teeth? It even lost some.
Senators goalie Craig Anderson lost a tooth in the 4-2 Game 1 Ottawa win when he was drilled in the head by a slap shot.
His Canadiens counterpart, Carey Price, lost the bottom of his two front teeth in Game 2 when he was clipped by defenceman Jarred Tinordi's skate during Montreal's 3-1 victory. Game 3 in Ottawa, a 6-1 win for the home team, was a gong show - 236 penalty minutes, including a third-period line brawl and MacLean actually calling a timeout with 17 seconds left on the clock, leading by five goals.
With that, Therrien's complexion became a red you only see in the cartoons.
The Senators swept the last two, 3-2 in Ottawa and finally 6-1 back at the Bell Centre.
Game 4 featured a few eyebrow-raising late-game calls to the disadvantage of the Canadiens on which Ottawa pounced; still, no excuses, as the team's posted motto had declared since Day 1 of the season, the Senators clearly were the superior team.
Many fair-weather Habs fans abandoned ship midway through the third period of the finale back at the Bell Centre, their heroes trailing badly, the arena halfempty at the final siren. Those who fled showed a wonderful appreciation of their team that had finished dead last in the Eastern Conference the year before, rebuilt its front office and coaching staffduring the summer, was building a strong future, then had this shopping list of misery during the playoffs:
Price suffered a knee injury in Game 4 and was forced to yield the net to backup Peter Budaj for the final match.
Captain Brian Gionta was shelved with a torn bicep that required surgery a few days after elimination.
Eller was sidelined, though believing he'd be ready to go if the Canadiens advanced to the semifinals.
Prust missed Game 5 with a separated shoulder, a joint he himself pressed back into place in the corridor outside his dressing room in Game 4 overtime.
Max Pacioretty played Games 3 to 5 with a dislocated shoulder suffered in Game 1 that forced him out of Game 2.
Defenceman Alexei Emelin was watching it all from rehab, having been sidelined in early April with a torn ACL.
The virtually indestructible Andrei Markov - and after his two knee reconstructions, how strange to call him that? - wasn't leaning on the clinic crutch.
"We can't say we're looking for excuses with injuries," Markov said in the wake of elimination. "Every team has them, but the good teams find a way to play (with) them.
"We lost some guys, but at the same time, some other players stepped up and played well (in place of ) them. If we lost the series, it means we didn't play hard enough."
The Canadiens of two years ago couldn't solve Senators goalie Anderson, who had a .950 save percentage in the five-game series, and they were outscored 20-9. Now they face the netminding revelation that is the Hamburglar, Andrew Hammond. Where Price was off-the-charts brilliant all season long, leading the NHL in save percentage (.933), goals-against (1.96) and wins (44), the journeyman Hammond has been magnificent for Ottawa, losing just once in his 23 decisions, fractionally better statistically than Price during the stretch run.
In four games against Ottawa this season, the Canadiens were outscored 14-9, losing three times.
That means less, perhaps, than momentum.
The glass-half-full crowd believes the Senators are a team of destiny, surely their dazzling charge to get into the playoffs being only the start of something magical.
Those with a tumbler half empty will tell you the Senators will be on fumes, having drained their tank just getting to the postseason, and the only direction for them to go now isn't up.
But this is why they play the games. Stack up the Canadiens and Senators any way you like, crunch the numbers to tell any tale you want.
And then remember that hockey, especially unforgiving playoffhockey, is played on ice, not on paper.
Surely, the Canadiens-Senators matchup getting underway on Wednesday can't be as deliciously bizarre as their only series to date.
Can it? dstubbs@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/Dave_Stubbs
Credit: DAVE STUBBS; The Gazette
Illustration CANADIAN PRESS FILES / Then-Ottawa Senators coach Paul MacLean, shown during the 2013 playoff series between Ottawa and the Montreal Canadiens, landed in hot water with Habs coach Michel Therrien and the team's fans for an apparent lack of sensitivity for an injured Lars Eller.

