It wasn't a record snowfall, but the amount of snow that fell between Thursday and Friday was still a lot to handle.
Environment Canada reported between 35 and 45 centimetres of snow fell on the island of Montreal between Thursday and Friday, with close to 40 reported at Trudeau airport.
"It's not really a record, especially considering it didn't all fall on one day," Environment Canada meteorologist Julie Deshaies told the Montreal Gazette.
She said the snowstorm appeared to have hit all areas in the province along the St. Lawrence River nearly equally, with up to 50 centimetres recorded in the hardest-hit areas.
Another five to seven centimetres of snow are forecast by Monday night, Deshaies said.
The snowfall was a welcome treat for children braving the frigid temperatures to venture out to the numerous winter carnivals in the area, such as in King George Park in Westmount on Saturday, or Connaught Park in Town of Mount Royal on Sunday.
City crews began loading and carting away the snow on Saturday morning. Spokesperson Philippe Sabourin said the operation will probably last until at least Friday, given how much snow fell. He said it's fairly rare for the city to experience a snowfall as extreme as what fell this week.
"There were high winds, so there was a lot of snow that fell from the roofs that (will add) to the total amount that has to be taken away," Sabourin said. "We normally get a storm of this magnitude once every two years. Citizens will have to be patient. It represents a huge challenge."
Sabourin said the operation will cost the city about $40 million altogether, but residents can help it go more smoothly by minding no-parking signs, as each car parked illegally in a snow bank adds 10 minutes to the overall operation. Sabourin said the city towed away 45 cars per hour during its last operation, which was a decrease from 75 per hour during the first clearing operation.
He said the city's snow dump sites have plenty of capacity and should be able to handle the amount of snow that fell.
Sabourin added the city's emergency services are asking residents not to park their cars on an angle, because that could slow down police cars, ambulances and fire trucks on their way to help someone in distress.
The city's fire department is asking residents to be aware of their balconies and their emergency exit doors to ensure they are not blocked by snow. Dryer vents also have to be cleared to avoid a fire hazard, the department said.
The Régie du batiment du Québec said homeowners and building owners should pay attention to the amount of snow that has accumulated on their roofs, and shovel it out if necessary. The work should be done by professionals, the organization said.
While it will take some time until the roads are in good shape, Sabourin said citizens should expect their sidewalks to be cleared.
"They are all in a good state, but we could have missed a few spots. If citizens see any place where the sidewalks are not cleared properly, they can call us," Sabourin said.
He said citizens can call the city's hotline at 311, or take a picture and submit it to the city through its mobile application.
Anyone looking to know more about snow removal in their borough can visit the city's website at montreal.ca/deneigement. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist

