It's a weird dynamic, the fine art of losing competitively.
The Ottawa Senators haven't won a game since before Christmas. Only the Detroit Red Wings have a worse record.
During their current season-high seven-game losing streak, they've been defeated by the Red Wings, by the New Jersey Devils (last in the Metropolitan Division), and on Saturday, by the Montreal Canadiens, who ended their own eight-game slide in the process.
For all that, there's little despair over all the games that have slipped away.
Senators coach D.J. Smith suggests there has been no loss of energy or enthusiasm despite the long run of losses.
"I don't think anyone is thinking that way," he said. "We're playing way better defensively. The last two nights (against Detroit and Montreal) easily we could have won, so I think our guys are playing well."
Even a player with as competitive a spirit as winger Brady Tkachuk - he led all players in the 2-1 overtime loss to Montreal in shots (six) and hits (six) - wasn't in any mood to kick garbage cans around the dressing room or beat himself up about the many lost opportunities against the Canadiens.
"You can take the good out of the games that you know you played well in," Tkachuk said. "And some of that, we can learn from. We're right there. We've had a bunch of overtime games. It's just a matter of time (before) things are going to turn around."
Never lose sight of the big picture, though. While the players on the ice are doing whatever they can to win and secure their positions in the NHL, either here or somewhere else, making the playoffs isn't part of the conversation.
More and more, the final 37 games will be about giving younger players a bigger taste while general manager Pierre Dorion entertains offers for veterans in advance of the Feb. 24 trade deadline.
Accordingly, goalie Marcus Hogberg has played in consecutive games, a test run for what will likely see him sharing time with the injured Anders Nilsson next season.
Prospects Drake Batherson and Filip Chlapik are now seeing significant minutes with the goal of making them better players tomorrow. Batherson scored the Senators'only goal against the Canadiens, but he also says he needs to learn from how he handled the play leading up to Ilya Kovalchuk's game-winning goal in the extra frame.
The on-the-job training means losses will likely continue to pile up in the short term, but there are potentially enormous fringe benefits from finishing at or near the bottom.
It's no grand organizational secret that the more the Senators lose, the more they win when it comes to the 2020 NHL draft lottery.
Entering Sunday's games, the Senators owned a 16-per-cent chance of securing Canadian world junior championship star Alexis Lafreniere by winning the draft lottery.
They effectively have two shots at him - with their own pick and the one they secured from the San Jose Sharks in the trade of former captain Erik Karlsson. The Sharks could still make a late run at the post-season, meaning their first round draft pick won't be subject to the lottery, but that's highly unlikely.
In a best-case scenario, the Senators could have two Top 5 choices in June.
That hope could all serve as a welcome starting point for incoming CEO Jim Little in his difficult challenge to sell optimism to the community.
Previous management salesmen Tom Anselmi and Nic Ruszkowski didn't last long after failing to bring back the fans and businesses who have disappeared out of frustration with the uncertainty of the organization under owner Eugene Melnyk.
That has resulted in Canadian Tire Centre being half empty on most nights this season as the Senators trail the league in attendance.
A notable exception came Saturday, when a flood of Canadiens fans came in droves, happily enduring the freezing rain and ice pellets before and after filling the empty seats to cheer on their team. Kovalchuk and goaltender Carey Price left the building to loud applause following the game.
The energy in the building had Smith dreaming about what could be.
"You can feel there's something special when you're playing them and the rivalry," he said.
"Over time, as we build this young team, I think you're going to hear more chants for our guys than you're going to hear for theirs." kwarren@postmedia.com Twitter.com/Citizenkwarren

