It has only been a few weeks since Mayor Valérie Plante shook up the city executive committee and created a brand new post.
Laurence Lavigne Lalonde, a councillor from the Mercier-Hochelaga-Maisonneuve borough, was put in charge of "ecological transition and resilience."
It's a somewhat vague job description and a title heavy with the latest environmental jargon. But what might, in the past, have been called sustainable development, is now freighted with the gravity of the threat posed by climate change.
What Lavigne Lalonde will be doing is aiming for the best while preparing for the worst. She'll be in charge of marshalling every tool within the city's reach to reduce emissions and transition to a low-carbon future while ensuring the city is ready to deal with the dire consequences of climate change, from floods and heat waves to extreme weather and food scarcity. (Urban agriculture is also her purview.)
Lavigne Lalonde was preparing to roll out a series of announcements related to her new gig during Earth Week. But on the eve of the big occasion, she took time to discuss her new job - the creation of which was designed to send a message.
"It's saying this is an issue of importance and urgency. We can't just leave it in the shadows of other portfolios. So we're bringing it out into the light to really create the possibility of acting," she said.
"It's saying to citizens, to our partners: 'This is important to us and we want to give it all necessary attention.'" Montreal already set a goal to be carbon neutral by 2050, but there's a long way to go to hit that target. One of Lavigne Lalonde's first tasks is evaluating each service and department to gauge their greenhouse-gas emissions, then looking for ways to slash their output.
"Those are our objectives, and from there our actions must flow," she said.
Lavigne Lalonde will help define what ecological transition ultimately means for Montreal, but already she likens her role to that of an "orchestra conductor," co-ordinating the work of many departments.
Her mandate will include parts of environment, which remains a stand-alone portfolio on the executive committee, but also aspects of urban planning, civil security, waste management, transportation and economic development related to climate change. She may consider measures to take aim at single-use plastics, beyond Montreal's ban on plastic bags. She will certainly look at what cities elsewhere in the world are doing, harnessing that knowledge, sifting through data and instituting best practices in Montreal.
Even if countries are the signatories of major climate accords, it's often cities taking bold action to curb climate change.
Paris is widely seen as leading the revolution. The adaptation measures it has undertaken are both large in scope and small in scale. From barring cars from certain areas, to instituting bans on certain types of cars to monthly car-free days, Paris is putting a dent in emissions. It is also transforming concrete schoolyards to green space and planning to plant a forest larger than Central Park.
Meanwhile, New York City on Thursday unveiled an aggressive emissions reduction plan. Touted as a Green New Deal for the city, it will require the retrofitting of residential and office buildings and will institute new standards for carbon-neutral construction. The Big Apple also recently became the first city in North America to introduce congestion pricing. Soon, vehicles entering some of the busiest parts of Manhattan will have to pay.
These are bold moves, radical even. Are Montrealers ready? Lavigne Lalonde acknowledged a big part of her job will be building awareness, educating the public and winning hearts and minds for the adaptation that must take place. Explaining and consulting on new measures will certainly come with the territory.
"But sometimes the proof comes from the result. If people see a reserved lane installed on their street, at first they're against it," she said. "When they can see how a measure works or how it improves their lives, they get on board."
Although she expects to face a backlash somewhere along the way, Lavigne Lalonde is convinced Montrealers are actually singing from the same songbook on the need to mitigate climate change.
"I think there's a consensus in Montreal that there's something happening and we have to do something about it. But the solutions might not be the same in every part of the city."
Her most important task may well end up being finding harmony amid the noise. ahanes@postmedia.com
CREDIT: ALLISON HANES;The Gazette

