A world-renowned expert in post-traumatic stress disorder is warning Quebec authorities to provide long-term psychological and financial support to the victims of the province's worst flooding on record or face an unprecedented wave of anger.
"This is a test for the authorities," said psychologist Pascale Brillon, who trained the social workers who responded to the victims of the 2013 train derailment in Lac-Mégantic that killed 47 people.
Unlike Lac-Mégantic, a once-in-a lifetime disaster, the flooding in the past three weeks occurred only two years after the spring inundations of 2017. Many flood victims fear more flooding in the future as a consequence of climate change.
"The authorities have to be there when it's less sexy, three months from now," Brillon added. "This is when everyone else will be on vacation and having fun. But the victims will feel that they're all alone."
Brillon, who has written extensively about PTSD, said the trauma suffered by flood victims is unique in that many end up being consumed with anger at the government over what they perceive to be the slow pace in obtaining financial compensation.
What's more, flood victims sometimes find it difficult to receive psychological support compared with the victims of violence or work accidents, Brillon observed.
The provincial government has adopted a new flood-compensation program this year. Premier François Legault has pledged that claims will be processed faster than they were in 2017. Under the new program, those flooded will receive a lifetime maximum of $100,000 to repair flood damage. Those who choose to move will be indemnified up to $200,000 for their houses.
But a number of flood victims have already complained that the new program is far from ideal, with one Île-Bizard resident saying that the premier could "go f- himself."
And as the number of evacuees rose to more than 10,000 across the province on Tuesday afternoon, it's not clear whether the government has boosted psychosocial resources for victims. On Saturday, hours before the emergency evacuation of Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac, Health Minister Danielle McCann told reporters that the government would deploy a total of 60 social workers and psychologists to assist flood victims.
McCann's office did not respond to queries by the Montreal Gazette since Monday about whether the ministry planned to increase the number of "intervenants." Over the weekend, the Montérégie-Ouest health authority that oversees flood-stricken Rigaud increased the size of its psychosocial team from eight to 10 members.
Mathieu Allaire, the Montérégie-Ouest's coordinator of emergency measures, acknowledged that the psychological impact of the floods will be felt only in the coming months.
"We're still at the beginning, he said. "We've noticed that as soon as people saw that the flooding was going to go beyond the levels of 2017, we sensed some people were discouraged."
"What was hard for people in 2017 is they said the compensation process was complicated and long," he added. "This time around, the elected officials tell us it won't be as long or complicated. If that's not the case, it could lead to more of an impact."
Still, the social workers and psychologists assisting flood victims are mostly the same ones who helped in 2017 and have gained invaluable experience, said Jade St-Jean, a spokesperson for the Montérégie-Ouest health authority.
"There's a bond of trust that's been established between the workers and the flood victims," St-Jean added.
"They're better prepared and more proactive."
Based on Brillon's experience, the flood victims will go through two stages before experiencing symptoms of PTSD. In the first stage, their efforts are focused on trying to save their house as they erect sandbags around their property. In the next stage, they might feel euphoric as they re-enter their house after the floodwaters have receded.
But that euphoria will then give way to long-term PTSD symptoms including flashbacks, nightmares, anxiety, depression and anger in the months that follow.
Some victims will begin to associate the rain with flooding or avoid going to a lake. Others will start to "self-medicate" with alcohol, worsening their symptoms, Brillon noted.
Making matters worse is the uncertainty of dealing with another flood and making the difficult choice of either trying to sell their house or continue living in it. Psychological treatment will vary among individuals and can last from months to years.
CREDIT: Aaron Derfel

