Despite the heat wave upon us this week, this summer should be cooler than last summer, according to the current forecast.
"Today and the next couple of days should not be the rule for the whole summer," said André Cantin, meteorologist at Environment Canada. "If we look back, Montreal gets one or two heat waves per summer on average," he said.
Environment Canada issued the first heat warning of the summer on Wednesday.
"The beginning of July this year is quite similar to last year, but the warm temperatures we have today and tomorrow won't last as long as they did (last year)," Cantin said.
This week's heat wave will last until Friday, and starting Saturday the temperature is expected to drop to around 26 C.
This time last year, Montreal went through a seven-day heat wave that resulted in the deaths of 66 people, 13 more than what was initially reported.
Montreal only had one "official" heat wave last summer, said Cantin, although it may have felt like there were a couple. However, Cantin said "we were close many times" during July and August 2018 to having other heat waves.
"We talk about a heat wave when we have three days in a row with a maximum temperature of 30 C or more," Cantin said.
On several occasions last summer, we came close. During July and August, Cantin noted six times in which we had two consecutive days above 30 C, while the third day was just under the threshold.
Last year's heat wave did not set a record.
"I don't think there was a longer heat wave than the one in 2001," said Cantin, referring to a 10-day heat wave that lasted from Aug. 1 to 10 in Montreal.
That same year, the temperature was above 30 C for 17 cumulative days in July. In July 2018, there were only 11 days with temperatures above 30 C.
The earliest recorded heat wave in Montreal was in 1962, lasting three days from May 17 to 19.
"The average temperature for July is around 26 C for Montreal, and that's what we should expect (this summer)," Cantin said.
"That's not to say we won't have a couple days above 30 C," he added.
Meanwhile, Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante said on Wednesday the city is ready to deploy emergency measures if needed during this week's heat wave.
JUNE 2018 VS. JUNE 2019
The temperature this June was below the normal mean temperature of 18.6 C, Cantin said. The mean temperature in June 2018 was 19 C compared with 18.2 C this year.
If we compare temperatures in June 2018 with June 2019, each month only had two days with temperatures above 30 C. However, June 2019 was warmer because there were more days closer to the 30 C mark, Cantin said. manhoury@postmedia.com Twitter.com/mia_anhoury
CREDIT: MIA ANHOURY;The Gazette

