Climate change is making our winters more unpredictable and, consequently, harder to manage. Within a few days in early January, Montrealers saw 20 centimetres of snow, 20 millimetres of freezing rain, and intense freezing temperatures.The city of Montreal struggled to remove snow, salt the ice, and make the roads and sidewalks safe.
"This is an exceptional situation, and one of the worst that a city could go through in terms of snow removal," Philippe Sabourin, a spokesperson for the city of Montreal, said at the time. "On an operational level, these changing temperatures make things much more complex."
For Dr. Damon Matthews, climate change specialist and Concordia University professor in the department of geography, planning and environment, this is the new reality of a changing climate.
"Winters in Canada have been warming faster than other seasons," he explained. "The rule of thumb in terms of how it affects precipitation is that we're expecting more of it overall, but it's not more frequent. So we have more intense precipitation events."
Matthews, whose research on climate change recently demonstrated that the outdoor skating season in Canada has been significantly reduced over the years (see infographic), says we're especially seeing an increase in variability. "There were some pretty wild swings in temperature earlier this winter,"he noted."That's consistent with how climate change is affecting the jet stream."
Can we confront climate change in a way that's meaningful enough to make a difference? "The challenge is big," Matthews said. "There's no single solution, but there are lots of little solutions." The focus for a number of researchers in Montreal is developing solutions to reduce the impact of climate change.
BEING READY
When the city experiences power outages, in part due to increasingly extreme weather, the search for alternative energy sources becomes a priority. Dr. Pragasen Pillay, Concordia engineering professor and NSERC/Hydro-Quebec senior industrial research chair, is investigating sources of renewable energy already present in large buildings.
For example, processing food waste through large-scale composters and converting it to methane or electricity could be key to creating local power sources in Montreal's city centre. "This could be used for emergency back up power ,"Pillay said. "With these tall buildings, we still need to power elevators and light hallways. Being able to have this kind of energy locally for emergencies would be valuable."
In other words, if we're hit by another ice storm that's as severe as what we experienced in 1998, downtown Montreal would not lose power entirely. In fact, its buildings could generate and store some energy, and possibly even power traffic lights and other facilities.
A waste-to-energy approach also has added ecological benefits. For instance, if food waste is used for energy, it won't need to be carried to landfills. "You could process waste directly in the building, offsetting the building'sneeds," Pillay said. "You'd also reduce trucking needs, the cost of landfills, and the diesel and fuel required to take that food waste to landfills."
Pillay says other countries, meanwhile, are also producing alternative energy from landfills.
BETTER ROADS
Winter-readiness should also be measured by how well our infrastructures can endure harsh weather conditions. To that end, Concordia engineering professor Dr. Tarek Zayed and his team are working to find durable solutions for our roads.
Zayed and his team developed a Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) based management system,which provides information about how well the concrete's insides are performing after scanning a bridge deck using GPR.
When bridges in Montreal collapse or start chipping, it's also partly because of winter. "When bridges get older, they have concrete cracks," Zayed said. "These cracks carry the salt and water from rain, which quickly deteriorates the rebar inside the concrete. It'll corrode and rust, and corrosion can'tbestopped. After a while, the bridge becomes dangerous because it cannot carry its load."
The Ministere des Transports du Quebec commissioned Zayed and his team to study the province's bridges using the GPR,hoping it will help them decide how we can make these types of structures safer.
The team is also studying road markings, which, as any driver has noticed, can fade away in just one season.That's because the very tools we use to deal with winter - snow plows and salt - make road markings disappear.So the trick is to find long-lasting materials that won't.
Markings can be made with water-based paints, thermoplastic, epoxy paint, tapes, or Methyl Methacrylate (MMA). "They're different in lifespan," Zayed explained. "Sometimes it's done by water-based paint, which is the least expensive, but has a shorter duration. Usually, at stop signs and traffic lights, they use epoxy,which lasts longer."
THROUGH THE ROOF
Concordia engineering professor Dr. Hashem Akbari is remarkably optimistic in the face of climate change and the extreme winters it causes.
"For the first time, it was documented that the ozone hole in the South Pole was repairing itself," he said. "That was because of the protocol refusing the use of CFCs around the world.It's an example of implementing the science and coming to the expected result."
Akbari has been working on ways to make cities cooler to reduce their impacton Global Warming. He calls cities "heat islands," because their temperature is often about five degrees warmer than suburban or rural areas. His work looks for ways to cool down a city's hottest surfaces - usually roofs and pavements - which cool air temperatures by up to three degrees and improve air quality, both indoors and outside.
Cooling roofs and pavements is a strategy that has a long arm. It causes a decrease in air-conditioner use,it reduces the demand and consumption of energy, and it can cut down greenhouse gas emissions. "Reducing the air temperatures in Los Angeles by just three degrees Celsius is as effective as having everyone in the city drive electric cars," Akbari said.
One solution he recommends is white roofs,which reflects hort wave radiation back to the sky. In principle, they work similarly to rooftop gardens, or "green roofs," but they don't incurany incremental costifa cool roof is specified for the original installation."With roof top gardens, you need to move dirt to the top of building, you need water, you need the structure to support the weigh," he noted.
Roofs are also available in other highly reflective coloured materials, or absorbent surfaces, which can contain water, allowing it to evaporate slowly, and thus cool the air. As for pavements, while more needs to be developed, cool stones are one way to keep these surfaces cold and permeable.
That these technologies are available now explains why Akbari is so hopeful. "We can and we will make a difference," he said. His work on cool surfaces proves it.
Credit: OLIVIA COLLETTE; Postmedia Works
Illustration MAKING ICE RINKS: Source: "Observed decreases in the Canadian outdoor skating season due to recent winter warming," Environmental Research Letters, NikolayN. Damyanov (Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences,McGill University), H. Damon Matthews (Department of Geography, Planning and Environment, Concordia University), Lawrence A.Mysak (Global Environmental and Climate Change Centre,McGill University) SHRINKING ICE RINKS: Source: National Capital Commission.

