The city was slow to clear streets and sidewalks of ice and snow last week because of a "record level of absenteeism" among blue-collar workers, Projet Montreal Leader Luc Ferrandez said.
The mayor of the Plateau-Mont-Royal borough said six of the 12 drivers for sidewalk tractors in his borough didn't show up for duty during the first few days after the storm.
The number of no-shows in the city's ranks peaks at this time of year because workers tend to take advantage of their remaining sick days before the new year, he said in an interview with the Montreal Gazette.
"What happens is that if you need just eight or 10 employees one Sunday night to put sand on the sidewalk, that's OK because you have a big basin of employees to call," he said.
However, occasions like last Wednesday - when blue-collars were called on simultaneously to spread salt, remove snow, collect recycling and fix water leaks - stretched the city's resources thin.
"That's when it hurts the most," he said. "It was hard to finish all the activities in time last Wednesday. It happens in every borough, and it happens every year."
Ferrandez said the city could save itself some trouble by renegotiating blue-collars' collective agreements so sick days are recalculated in the spring or summer. The city would then be sure to have enough troops for a snow-removal blitz.
Another solution might be prepaid sick days that would only be deducted from a worker's pay in case of absence, Ferrandez said.
He challenged the explanation put forward by Michel Parent, the president of the city's blue-collar workers' union, that the city didn't ask snow crews to work overtime to save money.
"We don't want to alienate employees, we don't want to cut due advantages. But at one point, it's unfair to say that the boroughs are trying to save money, (and) that's why the snow removal wasn't as fast as it should have been," Ferrandez said.
Last week's storm made a mess of roads and sidewalks, especially in the Plateau and Cote-des-Neiges- Notre-Dame-de-Grace.
Harout Chitilian, the vice-president of the city's executive council, said it was possible that blue-collar workers refused to work overtime.
"One hundred per cent of the equipment available to the city of Montreal was being used to address this issue (snow removal)," Chitilian told the media last Tuesday.
In a meeting of the executive committee the next day, he said there would be an audit on the snow removal.
Louis-Pascal Cyr, the mayor's director of communications, said the audit would reveal if there was a high level of absenteeism among snow-removal crews. He couldn't say if the level of absenteeism is a recurring problem for the city at this time of year.
The city's executive committee will release the results of the audit in its next meeting on Wednesday morning.
gvendeville@montrealgazette.com twitter.com/geoffvendeville
Credit: GEOFFREY VENDEVILLE; Montreal Gazette

