This summer's multiple deaths in Quebec from the heat wave illustrate the terrible price of social isolation. Most of the victims were elderly, alone and largely without support.
Yet there is a remedy, a strategy that could make a world of difference. Making intergenerational connections - linking elders and young people in a variety of ways - reduces isolation, and enhances a sense of belonging, of community and civic responsibility for both groups.
We see evidence of this in the anglophone sector with Quebec's network of Community Learning Centres. Financed by minoritylanguage funding from the federal government, these CLCs offer learning and leisure activities to a multi-generational clientele, but only occasionally do the age groups mix.
The real benefit is when the generations connect, learn from one another and support one another. There are many wonderful examples at present, including seniors volunteering at a daycare centre, schoolchildren visiting nursing homes, teens teaching grandparents to navigate the internet and intergenerational cafés bringing elders and high school students together for conversation. In several schools, elders run the breakfast club, help with reading circles and extracurricular activities such as the knitting and chess clubs.
With seniors outnumbering young people, and many remaining fit and active in their post-retirement years, there is a tremendous potential for elders to provide service to others, even as some need services. However we need pathways for the generations, schools and seniors'organizations to connect.
One such effort is underway in Montreal with the development of WIN - the West-end Intergenerational Network. The group currently includes educators from the English Montreal School Board, representatives from seniors'organizations such as the N.D.G. Senior Citizens Council, Extra Miles Senior Visiting Program, faculty members from Concordia University, the director of the P'tit Profs'CPE and students.
WIN was started last fall to facilitate collaboration among community partners, to raise awareness about intergenerational practice and its benefits, promote connections and encourage the creation of innovative programs. This is particularly timely, since many schools now include service learning and volunteer work as a requirement for graduation.
What is needed to realize this potential fully are people in place to facilitate the recruitment, vetting and deployment of volunteers, and to help teachers, schools and seniors'centres to connect. A good example of this is S.K.I.P. in Brantford, Ont. S.K.I.P. - Seniors and Kids Intergenerational Programs - has developed over a decade, with a partnership that includes school boards, a service club, and corporate sponsors.
For WIN, this may be possible in the short term with grants and donations, but the ultimate solution is for much closer collaboration among key provincial ministries to support intergenerational approaches in health, education and social services. A small example - which would bring joy into seniors'residences - would be to require those of substantial size to have a small daycare embedded or adjacent - either through incentives or regulation.
Another would be to encourage and financially support more of our public schools to be truly community schools.
These provide points of service for medical and social services such as vaccination and flu clinics and referrals, as well as contact zones for intergenerational activities. Instead of serving a narrow slice of the population for 200 days a year, these publicly funded institutions could be serving people across the life span 12 months a year.
Intergenerational practice contributes to more inclusive, cohesive communities, the breakdown of barriers and stereotypes, and volunteer activities that contribute to the public good (such as community gardens, environmental projects, library volunteers). And - in a crisis, such as a heat wave or a snowstorm - such communities will be more resilient and responsive, and likely save lives.
But it will require political leadership and creative thinking among the policy-makers in key ministries to tap the potential for the welfare of all. Don Rosenbaum, 70, is a founding member of WIN.
CREDIT: DON ROSENBAUM;The Gazette



