Montreal Mayor Valérie Plante insists she's a fan of winter.
"Am I allowed to like winter? It's beautiful," Plante told reporters Monday afternoon.
Plante could be excused for hating the cold season after two challenging winters marked by early snowfall, ice storms and flash freeze episodes, and now one of the earliest snowfalls in city history forecast for Monday into Tuesday.
However, hours before the snowfall was set to begin, the Plante administration was already apologizing for a slower than normal response to a dusting of snow and ice that left roads and sidewalks slippery in many spots on Monday morning.
Verdun Mayor Jean-François Parenteau, the city executive member in charge of snow removal, said slippery sidewalks and roads on Monday morning were caused by the fact that snow and ice wasn't removed as quickly as normal since most snow removal contracts only begin on Friday.
Parenteau said because of that, fewer people than usual were out plowing and spreading salt.
"We work with smaller teams until then, and it's the first time we have had conditions like that so early in November," Parenteau said.
However, he said the city called its contractors early Monday and asked them to start the season earlier, so they will be ready for the storm. Montreal is expecting more than 15 centimetres of snow between Monday and Tuesday. Plante said it's the earliest major snowfall in 36 years.
"But we will be ready," Plante told reporters.
This year, the city is giving boroughs more liberty to handle snow clearing by allowing them to declare two removal operations independently of city-wide directives.
The city has purchased 33 new salt spreaders for sidewalks, and will deploy its mobility squad when weather conditions make roads difficult to manoeuvre.
City hall opposition leader Lionel Perez blasted Plante's record on snow clearing, saying she offers only excuses for poor service.
And he said without a significant increase in the snow-clearing budget for this winter, he's expecting more of the same.
Perez said the roughly $3-million increase in this year's budget covers only inflation. He'd like to see the city up its snow-removal budget by at least $20 million.
"It's just a snowflake in the bucket," Perez said about the budgetary increase. "We are going to make sure the city lives up to the expectation of what Montrealers deserve when it comes to snow removal.
"They pay enough taxes; they're entitled to good basic services, and we haven't seen that in the last two years."
Earlier Monday, Jonathan Trudeau, president of the Association des entrepreneurs de déneigement du Québec, told the Montreal Gazette contractors are bitter already because the city arbitrarily changed the way it measures the amount of snow being removed.
He said the change has not been approved by his association and represents thousands in lost revenue for his members.
As well, Trudeau said he's concerned about the effect of the province's labour shortage on snow removal services. It could become difficult to hire and retain employees in the middle of the winter when they are needed, he said.
Plante said she shares Trudeau's concern.
"People don't want to work nights and weekends, and sometimes it becomes (challenging to recruit people)," Plante said.
Parenteau added that various work sites in the city, like the Turcot Interchange project, are luring away experienced truck drivers that would otherwise work for the city to remove snow. Postmedia News
CREDIT: Postmedia News

