QUEBEC Let's face it, a crisis is what Quebec premiers do best.
There was Pauline Marois in the 2013 Lac-Megantic train tragedy and the fire at a L'Isle-Verte seniors residence. Lucien Bouchard in the 1998 ice storm.
In all cases, Quebec's leaders put their immediate political concerns aside to rise to the occasion and actually lead the province through times of great distress.
And as sad as such events are - and Quebec seems plagued by the most grim - they can actually lead to positive outcomes once the dust settles; a way to break a logjam in public opinion, create change or, in this case, lance the boil that religious minority-majority relations have become.
Two years into his mandate, Premier Philippe Couillard got just such a crisis, this week, in the horrific shooting deaths of six Muslim men, standing in prayer, in a mosque in the sleepy Quebec City suburb of Ste-Foy.
"I immediately felt it was a turning point for our society," Couillard said Friday after a Liberal caucus here when asked by the Montreal Gazette about the week that was.
"You know how affirmative I have been over the years on the issue of inclusion and an open, tolerant society.
"It came to get me very, very deeply. I felt a lot of the pain. I felt the need to rally everyone in Quebec around this concept of equal citizenship and tolerance.
"That's what I'm here for, essentially."
In other words, Couillard was doing his job and, although unpleasant, had a chance to wade in deep on an issue he understands well enough to not underestimate its explosive potential.
He was everywhere, starting Sunday evening when events yanked him from his bed in St-Felicien to rush back to calm the province and especially the rattled and stunned provincial capital in a middle-ofthe night news conference.
The next day, on a few hours' sleep, there he was with Regis Labeaume - Quebec City's shaken mayor - at the first emotional news conference with Muslim leaders at Quebec City hall. The tears were flowing on all sides.
In the evening, he shared the stage with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and other political leaders at an evening vigil in Ste-Foy, which drew about 5,000 people.
On Tuesday, the government admitted television cameras to a special cabinet meeting where ministers stood for a moment of silence before discussing government actions in the wake of a brutal wake-up call.
Emerging from cabinet, Couillard made one of a series of pitches for everyone to tone down the rhetoric when it comes to identity politics because, as he said, words can be "knives, slashing at people's conscience."
"Freedom of speech has consequences, good ones and bad ones," he said. "We're all responsible."
But it was the two major speeches he delivered, at the Montreal funeral Thursday and the one in Quebec City Friday, where Couillard the humanist opened his heart in remarks made directly to the beleaguered and hurt community.
"We feel your pain," he told the thousands in Montreal.
"We share your pain. Our thoughts and prayers are with you. When one of you suffers, we all do."
On Friday, Couillard used his speech to translate certain Arabic words, which he said are too often associated with terror and violent acts because they appear helter skelter in movies and the media.
"We see now what these words mean for the Muslim community," he said. "They are spiritual words."
His ease connecting to the community and language had to be a sweet moment for Couillard.
For years his opponents have tried to paint him as ill-equipped to deal with identity issues because in his youth he spent time in Saudi Arabia working as a doctor.
No longer a negative, Couillard ran with it and it was noticed.
Boufeldja Benabdallah, cofounder of the Islamic cultural centre, heaped praise on both Trudeau and Couillard Friday in his remarks at the funeral.
"He (Couillard) gave us compassion," Benabdallah said. "He said words have strength, words have their place, words can wound and words can cause joy. Together, let's put words in the right place."
This was not the Couillard Quebecers are used to seeing. Often accused of being a cold, Cartesian intellectual, Couillard this week was the guy with a hug for the grieving family member and even a shoulder for Labeaume when he became emotional at the Montreal funeral.
It's true in a moment of crisis people naturally gravitate toward a person who incarnates stability, but Couillard earned some kudos from unlikely sources.
Journal de Montreal's columnist Richard Martineau, not a man considered particularly friendly to any politician, recognized that Couillard found the right words to say at the right time.
"He was calm, reassuring, dignified," Martineau wrote.
Couillard's tone was also praised in an editorial in the New York Times, which contrasted his plea for tolerance with U.S. President Donald Trump's confrontational vision of the planet.
There are other spinoffs in the wake of the crisis. Sparked in part by Mayor Labeaume, a kind of grassroots movement in Quebec City is growing to clean the trash radio stations - often identified as part of the problem.
One host, FM93 morning host Sylvain Bouchard, apologized on the air, acknowledging the station does not even have one phone number of a Muslim citizen on file to talk to on air.
Politically, there are signs of a fragile truce with the opposition Parti Quebecois and Coalition Avenir Quebec parties on identity. Both said this week Quebec has to be able to debate identity issues, with the PQ at least conceding there's a right way and a wrong way.
PQ Leader Jean-Francois Lisee was the first to take his lumps, agreeing his leadership campaign statement about the dangers of immigrants hiding AK-47's in burkas was out of line.
PQ leadership candidate Alexandre Cloutier said the legislature has not done enough to fight Islamaphobia.
Couillard went a step further, saying while the current climate does not lend itself to re-starting the identity debate, this might be the time to find common ground on the secularism legislation the Liberals currently have before the house, Bill 62.
The legislature resumes sitting next Tuesday.
"We agree on a great number of subjects (such as no face coverings for government services)," he said.
"Why not adopt together the things we agree on?" As he said earlier this week, he's hoping for a "before and after" in the attacks.
But Quebec has a way to go. After Thursday's vandalism of a mosque in Pointe-St-Charles, Quebec City police Friday arrested a 20-yearold man for allegedly hate-mongering on his Facebook page.
And as one white francophone man in the street in Quebec City remarked Thursday, a day after seeing the thousands who attended the Montreal memorial: "Who knew there were that many Muslims in Quebec?" pauthier@postmedia.com
Credit: PHILIP AUTHIER; The Gazette
JACQUES BOISSINOT, THE CANADIAN PRESS / Quebec Premier Philippe Couillard, left, speaks to Boufeldja Benabdallah, co-founder of the Islamic cultural centre, at a Catholic church that honoured the victims of the mosque shooting during a mass Tuesday in Quebec City.; THE CANADIAN PRESS FILES / Then-Quebec premier Pauline Marois, right, meets a Lac-Megantic resident in the wake of the train tragedy in 2013.



