Montreal is partnering with three environmental organizations to achieve its goal of making the city carbon neutral by 2050, Mayor Valérie Plante announced Monday.
Flanked by representatives of the David Suzuki Foundation, the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group and the Trottier Family Foundation, Plante signed a twoyear agreement to work together to help reach the 2015 Paris Agreement goal of limiting increases in greenhouse-gas emissions to 1.5 per cent.
In addition to lending their expertise, the foundations will contribute at least $250,000 to help the city achieve its climate goals over the next two years, with the possibility of spending up to $400,000, depending on how needs evolve, she said.
"This is unique," said David Miller, regional director for North America of C40, an international network of major cities committed to addressing climate change.
"It's the first one of its kind where private philanthropy is funding a partnership like this to create a plan for real action against climate change to produce carbon neutrality by 2050," he said.
"This partnership I hope will be a model to other cities globally," Miller added.
Karel Mayrand, director of the David Suzuki Foundation for eastern Canada, said the 90 deaths during last summer's heat wave and the floods during the spring of 2017 demonstrate the urgency of taking action.
By pooling resources and sharing expertise, the partnership will make Montreal "a model for ecological transition and resilience," he said. The problem with many action plans adopted by governments around the world is the lack of a road map to ensure the goal of carbon neutrality becomes a reality, Mayrand said.
"There are measures but the measures don't necessarily determine the achievement of targets," he said.
The partnership will help chart a path for change by analyzing sectors responsible for the majority of emissions, starting with transportation, which produces 43 per cent of Quebec's GHG emissions - of which 80 per cent is from road traffic - according to a government report released last week.
The report showed Quebec is unlikely to meet its target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions (GGE) by 20 per cent from 1990 to 2020.
Transportation emissions grew by 21.9 per cent between 1990 and 2016, it said, while total emissions decreased by only 9.1 per cent during that period.
Residents of Greater Montreal owned 968,466 vehicles in 2017, a number that's grown by 115,000 since 2004, with 8,800 additional vehicles using the roads every year on average, according to statistics released by the city last month.
The partnership will also study buildings, responsible for 10.8 per cent of Quebec's emissions, Plante said.
One aspect of the partnerships'work will be getting buy-in from the public, since governments can't do this alone, Plante noted.
And reducing emissions from transportation and other sources won't happen without support from higher levels of government, added Plante, who has continued to push for the proposed Pink Line métro extension even though the Coalition Avenir Québec government has said it isn't a priority.
Miller said he did not want to tell the Quebec government what to do "but it's my perspective from being involved in municipal politics for a very long time that city governments, especially the mayor, understand what the transport needs of their community are, and I think that the policies and the projects that they develop should be the ones that are funded."
So in that sense, the Pink Line is "the right thing to do," he said.
In September, Montreal signed onto the One Planet Charter at the Global Climate Action Summit in San Francisco. mscott@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MARIAN SCOTT;The Gazette

