With the worst of the flooding probably past in Montreal, the massive job of cleaning up looms, Mayor Valérie Plante said Wednesday morning.
"Once we remove the dikes and once the level of the river goes down, the cleaning operation is going to start," Plante said at the weekly executive committee meeting.
While everyone needs to remain vigilant, since the weather outlook could change and another breached dike could cause further disaster, it's time to start looking ahead, said the mayor, appearing tired after two weeks of dealing with the flooding crisis.
Plante paid tribute to the massive and well co-ordinated effort by firefighters, police, the army, blue-collar workers, elected officials and citizens to stave off rising waters.
But even once the threat has ended, the work won't be over, she said.
"I want to talk about this because, of course, we have made advance preparations for the floods, but the cleanup will also be very demanding and require workers and volunteers," Plante said.
"I'm appealing to everyone, so that if anyone wants to lend a hand, to spend a nice day coming to take away sandbags, it will be much appreciated."
Plante also appealed to residents of boroughs affected by flooding for patience, over and above that which they have shown in the last few trying weeks, since the cleanup will take time and divert city workers from other seasonal tasks.
"We're asking you to be patient with the different teams from the boroughs, because we know that when we clean the shores, because it has to be done and the sandbags will all have to be picked up, it will slow down spring cleaning operations like street cleaning," she said.
"So I'm asking the public to be understanding."
On Facebook, the Pierrefonds-Roxboro borough also thanked residents for their patience, noting that normal spring cleaning operations were behind schedule because of floods.
"If certain regular operations have slowed down, they should be restored as soon as the situation will return to normal," the borough said.
More than 10,300 Quebecers were still out of their homes as of Wednesday afternoon, as Premier François Legault promised an action plan to deal with the aftermath of the floods. A total of 7,060 homes across the province were flooded and 3,431 homes isolated by water.
In Montreal, with colder than usual temperatures and rain expected overnight Wednesday to Thursday, 248 people had been evacuated, with 147 homes flooded and 49 homes isolated. Between two and four centimetres of snow were expected in the Laurentians, turning overnight to freezing rain. mscott@postmedia.com
CREDIT: MARIAN SCOTT;The Gazette

