A noted hydrologist is slamming the province's handling of recurrent flooding, saying it has the duty to better manage its water flow, rather than abandon those who have been flooded.
"People who live in flood zones are not culprits, and if they are flooded, it's not just their responsibility, but the responsibility of everyone," said Claude Marche, a retired engineer and hydrologist at the Université de Montréal.
The municipal affairs ministry recently published a map delineating a special intervention zone (SIZ) whereby those who live in that zone won't be covered for extreme damage to their home because of flooding, and instead will be eligible for up to $250,000 to abandon those homes.
Alexandre Lambert, a political attaché for Municipal Affairs Minister Andrée Laforest, told the Montreal Gazette this week the government is trying to reduce the cost of compensating those affected by springtime floods.
"We have done a courageous thing to review the rules in the flooded areas, something that was not done during the 2017 flood," Lambert said, adding that because of all the development that has been permitted in at-risk areas, the province has doled out more than $1 billion to flood victims since 2011.
Marche, however, said the province should not be blaming those who built in flood-prone areas, but instead address the root causes of flooding. He wrote a report last October analyzing possible solutions to recurrent flooding in the wetland area of Val Morin, where he lives. He submitted it to the ministry of environment and asked that experts be called in to test out his theories.
He said he was ignored. In the wake of this past spring's flooding, Val Morin resident Bill Prickett - whose home is flooded every year - has also been trying to speak with officials at the municipal affairs ministry and the environment ministry to propose a project to try to limit the severity of flooding in their Laurentians town. If the project is successful, the pair envisions coming up with solutions to flood zones all across the province. Marche said there is nothing wrong with permitting people to live in flood-prone areas as long as the province puts in place measures to limit the damage caused by flooding.
"We're going to get more flooding as the climate changes, so we have to learn how to live with these changes," Marche said. "Every area needs its own unique solution."
Prickett said he believes the province has the responsibility to educate all those who live in floodrisk areas so they can make their homes flood-proof or resistant to floods. He said the province can also use landscape architecture techniques and draw inspiration from cities like Amsterdam and Rotterdam in the Netherlands, which are located below sea level but have put in place measures to manage rainwater and rising sea levels.
In Rotterdam, for example, a public square in the middle of the town acts as a retention basin and when sea levels rise, water is directed to the square.
"This is something that has never been done in Quebec," Prickett said. "We have to continue our research, and right now, we're being blocked because we have had no response from the province. We have 250 communities that are implicated, so it will take 250 different solutions.
"There are experts around the world who can work on the question of land use."
"Instead, the government is taking a totally populist take on this, saying 'these people are in flood zones, they're getting damage; we don't want to pay for them.' "But some of these houses have been there for 100 years."
In his case, Prickett's Val Morin home is located in a wetland and it floods every year, but his home is built in such a way to resist the annual rising water.
"I know that a few weeks every year, I'm going to have to get to my house by taking a canoe," Prickett said.
Marche said the province has to change its mentality because it's easier in the long run to invest in making these areas livable rather than paying every year to compensate those who are flooded.
"These properties have an enormous economic value, and if we are able to eliminate the nuisance of flooding, they will have an even greater economic value, so it is our duty to reclaim these properties," Marche said. jmagder@postmedia.com Twitter.com/jasonmagder
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

