Whoever said getting there is half the fun? Surely few among the 150 passengers on a Grand Trunk train that had left Montreal's Bonaventure Station the evening of March 9, 1869, bound for Toronto.
Among the passengers was Myles Pennington, a Grand Trunk executive. He recorded in his diary that as the train departed, "there seems every prospect of slipping through to Toronto between snow storms." How wrong he was.
Trouble soon began. Snow started falling, and by dawn outside Brockville a blizzard was raging. The going became tougher and, just five kilometres short of Gananoque, the train shuddered to a complete halt.
Snow-clearing was not very efficient in those days. A train might have a kind of plow, like a giant cowcatcher, bolted to the front of the locomotive; but there were no rotary snowblowers, and in any event, locomotives a century and a half ago were far less powerful than today's behemoths.
This meant that, as winter dragged on, packed snow built up immediately to either side of the tracks, sometimes as high as 12 feet. The resulting canyon was ready-made for holding new falls of snow, and left little room for this snow to be pushed aside.
Not long after Pennington's train was stopped, a freight train came up from behind. Its engine was uncoupled and attached to the rear of the passenger train.
"And now commences a hard struggle of pushing behind and hauling in front," Pennington wrote, "and for two hours this is kept up with men all the time plying the shovel to keep the wheels clear. ... The two locomotives puff and scream and their driving wheels fly 'round but no progress is made, and the work is at last abandoned."
The passenger locomotive was then uncoupled from the rest of the train and, by itself, was somehow able to batter its way west, carrying the conductor in search of help. The passengers settled in to wait. There was no dining car, but some found odd bits of food in their bags: a few apples, perhaps, or a sandwich. "One gentleman finds an ancient meat pie, the relics of a lunch provided for a former railway expedition, and, though it looks hard and dry ... still is cut up, divided and pronounced an excellent morsel."
Several intrepid passengers bundled up and struggled through the storm to nearby houses. Thanks to the generosity of these farm families, they were able to return with more provisions. One man even had a jug of hot tea: "How he has kept the tea hot is a puzzle to all on board."
By evening snow was still falling. The passengers did their best to sleep, though some were disturbed by "all kinds of tunes upon the nasal organ" - that is, "the stentorian snore of the next neighbour."
The second morning, the conductor returned by sleigh with a large stock of food. He related how a relief train had been sent out from Kingston but had itself come to grief west of Gananoque. Later that day, however, three locomotives did break through to the stranded train and managed to pull it back to Kingston. "Here the Grand Trunk Company, with great liberality, has provided a free dinner for all the passengers, and full justice is done to it." Were their troubles over? Not yet. In the wee hours the following morning, the passengers were awakened to the news that two locomotives had derailed up ahead, near Grafton, Ont. They all were obliged to disembark and trudge single file through the snow past the derailment to a train waiting on the other side, "meeting ... another similar procession on march to take possession of the cars just vacated by us."
They eventually reached Toronto around 11 that morning. What ordinarily was a 16-hour journey took them fully 62 hours.
lisnaskea@xplornet.com
Credit: JOHN KALBFLEISCH; The Gazette

