Tim Coochey's house was flooded in 2017, and he's still paying the price for what he calls government mistakes.
Coochey's Des Maçons St. home was included in a moratorium flooding map issued by the Quebec government this week.
The map delineates an area called the zone d'intervention spécial (ZIS), where all building and renovations must be halted, and homeowners affected by flooding in the future within that zone may not get compensation from the province.
"We were flooded because of (faulty) infrastructure, because the sewers backed up, not because of the river level," said the longtime Pierrefonds resident. "Now I'm told I'm in a flood zone and my nest egg is worth half of what I paid because of government errors? I'm sorry, but no."
Pierrefonds-Roxboro borough mayor Jim Beis said the new map is causing major grief to anyone trying to build or renovate in the affected area, and that includes the borough, which is in the process of building a new municipal pool - a project that has now been halted.
"The reason (the Quebec government) did it quickly is they didn't want people to rush and get permits. So basically they closed the door until they figured it out," Beis told the Montreal Gazette this week.
"That's fine and dandy, but you didn't even consult me or anybody. I have (people) who've paid thousands of dollars to get to the permit stage. Now I have to stop everything." The map, as determined by aerial photography and satellite images, outlines areas that experienced flooding in 2017 and 2019.
It is an updated draft of a highly contested one issued last month, which showed thousands of homes in areas that were not affected by any flooding, now suddenly in the intervention zone - speculation being that cloud cover from the images created a false impression. Homeowners were permitted to contest the first map, and have until Aug. 19 to contest this version of the map. Another draft of the map will be issued in December.
Coochey said the new map appears to contain many errors, since it relies on aerial photographs, instead of using elevation levels to determine the risk of flooding.
"Something is obviously wrong with the map," he said. "If you look at the elevation levels of the areas now deemed to be in the flood zone, it makes no sense."
Klaus Bodnik agrees. His Roxboro home was also flooded in 2017, but in his case, too, it was groundwater that caused his basement to become submerged.
Bodnik sold his home in November and now lives in Île-Bizard. He said before the sale went through land surveyors evaluated the home and determined it to be located outside of the 100-year flooding zone. However, the province's map shows it to be located in the ZIS area.
"(The surveyors) evaluated the elevations of the whole property, and found out the property was above the 100-year level," Bodnik said.
Marie-Claude Nichols, the MNA for the Vaudreuil riding, which includes several of the areas affected by the two historic floods, slammed the government's approach to the flood map, saying it isn't properly consulting with citizens before drawing up maps that can dramatically affect property values, and the ability to renovate or build.
"There are a lot of people who are anxious, because there's a lot of incoherence on this map, and it's on the verge of incompetence," Nichols said. "We still have several people who weren't affected in either of the floods who find themselves on this map. People are angry, and they don't understand. I have heard from some people who have their homes for sale, and now they're not worth anything."
She said the government is moving too quickly to adopt a map, when it should be working with cities and towns to better determine the areas that are at risk.
"This government is acting all by itself," said Nichols, the opposition critic for municipal affairs. "Cities want to work with the government, and they are the ones who know the area and can say which areas were flooded. It should be the municipalities submitting their maps to the province, and the province making an overall map."
Making matters worse, Nichols said, people who are in the designated flood risk zone are not being told by the province, so every property owner has to consult the map online, and then send an email to the government by Aug. 19 to explain why they should not be included in the flood zone.
"We're in mid-July and people are on vacation, and they give people until Aug. 19," Nichols said. "This isn't a good way to work. No one is going to get a letter to their home notifying them about this."
Blair Feltmate, a professor at the School of Environment, Enterprise and Development at the University of Waterloo, said while there could be errors introduced in flood risk maps, people should not be surprised that when outdated flood maps are revised, many more homes are included in the area deemed at risk for floods.
"As a result of climate change, we are getting bigger storms with greater frequency, so the past weather is not an indication of the future," Feltmate said. "And over the course of the last 100 years, we have removed 60 to 80 per cent of the natural infrastructure that was here, and what was built tends to not absorb water well, and can affect flooding."
Nichols said she understands that principle, but the current draft has too many "incoherences."
"For example, the dam at Beauharnois is deemed to be located in the flood zone. That makes no sense at all," she said, adding that some areas located at the top of cliffs are also deemed to be at risk.
Bodnik said while the tools being used to create the flood map are debatable, he questions whether the government should be telling anyone they can't live in their homes, unless it purchases them outright for their fair market value.
"If people had the right to build in the past, they have the right to live there now," Bodnik said. "You can't take that away from somebody. The folks there built homes with permits granted by the community. The municipalities have been collecting taxes from these properties for all these years. You can't just tell people: 'Your property is worthless. Get out of here.'" jmagder@postmedia.com twitter.com/jasonmagder facebook.com/jasonmagderjournalist
CREDIT: JASON MAGDER;The Gazette

