MONTRÉAL, Jan. 31, 2019 /CNW/ - What do you get when you add a white-hot economy to North America's most livable and vibrant cultural city?  A 'perfect storm' where employers are going out of their way to attract the best and brightest employees. That's the message from this year's   Montréal's Top Employers , announced this morning by Mediacorp Canada Inc., which organizes the annual Canada's Top 100 Employers project.

"Montréal has long offered a remarkable quality of life, with a rich history and cultural attractions," says Anthony Meehan, Publisher at Mediacorp. "The city also now has the second-lowest unemployment rate on record – people are surprised to learn that it's lower than Toronto's – making the city an even more attractive place to work and live.  No other city in North America can match all of its strengths, both old and new."
"This year's winners reflect the city's stature as an educational powerhouse," adds Richard Yerema, Managing Editor of the Canada's Top 100 Employers project. "You don't find world-class technology and software companies in places that haven't invested in education and skills development – Montréal is home to strong, world-class educational institutions.  The city has benefitted from forward-thinking public investment that has built the foundation for these employers to thrive."
First published in 2006, Montréal's Top Employers is a special designation that recognizes employers in Greater Montréal that lead their industries in offering exceptional places to work. Employers were evaluated by the editors at Canada's Top 100 Employers using the same criteria as the national competition: (1) Physical Workplace; (2) Work Atmosphere & Social; (3) Health, Financial & Family Benefits; (4) Vacation & Time Off; (5) Employee Communications; (6) Performance Management; (7) Training & Skills Development; and (8) Community Involvement. Employers are compared to other organizations in their field to determine which offer the most progressive and forward-thinking programs. The annual competition is open to any employer with its head office in Greater Montréal; employers of any size may apply, whether private- or public-sector.
Founded in 1992, Mediacorp Canada Inc. is the nation's largest publisher of employment periodicals. Since 1999, the Toronto-based publisher has managed the Canada's Top 100 Employers project, which includes 18 regional and special-interest editorial competitions that reach over 15 million Canadians annually through a variety of magazine and newspaper partners. Mediacorp also operates Eluta.ca, the largest Canadian job search engine, which includes editorial reviews from the Canada's Top 100 Employers project and is now used by almost 8 million users in Canada each year. Together with Willis Towers Watson, Mediacorp also hosts the Top Employer Summit, Canada's largest conference for senior-level HR professionals.
The full list of Montr é al's Top Employers (2019)  was released today on the competition homepage. The winners were also announced in a special magazine published in the Montreal Gazette today. Detailed reasons for selection, with hundreds of stories on the winning employers and photos, were released by the editors today and are accessible via the competition homepage.
SOURCE Mediacorp Canada Inc.
View original content to download multimedia: http://www.newswire.ca/en/releases/archive/January2019/31/c5924.html



